

Authenticity's "TikTok"-ing Clock: Exploring the Implications of Sophisticated Tools for Performing Authenticity on TikTok
Source: Muhlenberg College Special Collections & Archives
Contributed by: Gault, Grace
Stable  URL:  


Rights Notes: IN COPYRIGHT; Posted with author permission.
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools  to  increase  productivity  and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact 
This item is being shared by an institution as part of a Community Collection.
For terms of use, please refer to our Terms & Conditions at https://about.jstor.org/terms/#whats-in-jstor

























Muhlenberg College Special Collections & Archives is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Muhlenberg College Special Collections & Archives













Authenticity’s “TikTok”-ing Clock: Exploring the Implications of Sophisticated Tools for Performing Authenticity on TikTok






Grace Gault

Muhlenberg College, Allentown, PA, USA Media & Communication Department Undergraduate High Honors Thesis
April 11, 2022


Abstract

Authenticity has undoubtedly emerged as a dominant “buzzword” in 21st century society, positioned as the ultimate goal in terms of psychological well-being, professional success, relationships, and more. It is particularly prominent as a guiding logic for self presentation on social media, specifically for the individuals whose livelihood is dependent on their “authentic” appeal, i.e., influencers. While authenticity itself hinges on the notion that all humans have an ultimate and absolute “true” self that is accessible and discoverable, it is rooted in a paradox when viewed in relation to sociological theorizations of the self. Accordingly, this research puts socio-philosophical theory into practice to investigate the contradictions inherent to the commodified self and its performance of authenticity. In recent years, it has become increasingly evident that creative labor on social media can carry enormous costs in terms of emotional
well-being and self-image, ultimately leading to widespread burnout within the influencer industry.
Through textual analysis of interviews with TikTok influencers, this paper refines existing scholars’ analyses of creative labor on social media and builds an argument around TikTok as a platform that affords influencers particularly sophisticated tools for performing authenticity and fostering intimacy with audiences. Through its distinct sociological approach, this research looks across disciplines in order to build a hypothesis around authenticity’s role within the uniquely psychological consequences associated with being an influencer.
Accordingly, this thesis directly ties influencer burnout to the paradoxical nature of authenticity in relation to performance and the costs it inevitably imparts upon the self-concept; this connection paves the way for a new terminology to explain these costs as a direct result of the distinct mingling of self with the emotional labor intrinsic to the job. By exploring the themes


1


yielded from influencer interviews, I examine the implications of TikTok’s sophisticated platform tools and illustrate the ways in which influencers’ self-narrated experiences are anchored by the tensions implicit to authenticity as a guiding logic on social media. In this way, my research provides insight into the durability of authenticity within modern society and points to its fragility in the face of new platform development and advancement.



































2


Introduction

If you live in 2022 and have access to the Internet, it is more than likely that you have come across a social media influencer in some way. They are the stars of the digital world, creating and posting new content each day across a variety of popular platforms, such as Instagram, Youtube, TikTok, and so forth. They amass enormous followings on social media through their “authentic” appeal to audiences and monetize these followings by endorsing products to their followers, who trust in them as more ordinary and relatable than traditional media personalities, like celebrities.
According to a recent report from Morning Consult, about 86% of surveyed young Americans, ages 13-38, said that they are willing to try out influencing on their social media platforms; 12% of young people said they already considered themselves an influencer (Min, 2019). A similar report by Education & Employers found that “social media star” was the
fourth-most popular career aspiration for kids across the globe (Chambers, Kashefpakdel, Rehill, & Percy, 2018). Because young people today have grown up on the internet and social media, their world view has been shaped by what they see online and who they see online. Not only do modern social media users understand and mimic influencers’ behaviors as a result of their ubiquitous presence, but many also anticipate that being an influencer is somewhat easy and feasible, making it a growing career aspiration. However, it takes more than internet access and a camera to become an influencer; it takes a certain kind of self presentation. In the 21st century culture of personality (Susman, 1979), where self-promotion and authenticity oxymoronically combine to form the ideal American self, social media influencers confront the tensions inherent to this paradoxical coupling every single day (Pooley, 2010). As such, the emotional labor




3


intrinsic to influencers’ self presentation produces certain social tensions in their daily lives–tensions that are particular to an existence in which the self is commodified.
It has become increasingly evident, in recent years, that creative labor on social media can carry enormous costs in terms of emotional well being and self-image. In June of 2021, The New York Times published a piece with the headline “Young Creators are Burning Out and Breaking Down,” noting that many individuals who found fame on TikTok are now struggling with mental health issues (Lorenz, 2021). This pattern of creator burnout has a history, tracking all the way back to the original YouTube stars of the early 2000’s, many of whom burnt out and no longer have an online presence today. However, recent news of burn out within the influencer industry points to the increasingly unsustainable nature of the job and the uniquely psychological underpinnings of online fame based around “authentic” personality.
Emma Chamberlain, one of the most popular and most talked-about influencers on the internet today, has recently decided to take a break from her content-creating lifestyle, citing perpetual burnout as the genesis. Since beginning her career on YouTube in 2016, Chamberlain has garnered over 1.5 billion views across her videos, amassing over 11 million subscribers on YouTube and 15.3 million followers on Instagram today. The actual content of her videos is not her selling point, though–it’s her personality. Her appeal is wrapped up in a unique sense of authenticity, engaging viewers through her quirky, relatable charm and casually humorous
vlog-style videos. In a 2019 profile of the influencer, The New York Times claimed that Chamberlain “changed the world of online video” by inventing the way that people “communicate authenticity” today (Bromwich, 2019). Chamberlain’s imperfect, silly, and accessible persona allowed her to foster a level of intimacy and friendship within her following, paving the way for other influencers to leverage their likability for engagement and monetary


4


gain. However, after more than four years at the job, Chamberlain has burnt out and decided to take a break from YouTube, taking to her podcast entitled “Anything Goes” in February 2022 to explain her dilemma.
In an episode titled “the truth about youtube,” she acknowledges the irony of burnout from a career on YouTube, noting that “it seems like something that should not happen” (Chamberlain, 2022, 04:35-04:44). There is a general perception that social media influencers have one of the easiest jobs on the planet–how hard can it really be to post one video a week? The answer seems to be: much harder than one might expect. On her podcast, Chamberlain discusses many elements of creative labor that have contributed to her own burn out, emphasizing the “all consuming” nature of a job in which one makes content about their daily life (Chamberlain, 2022, 03:56-04:23). When the self becomes commodified, as it does for influencers, the line between work and life gets blurred. Chamberlain explained that she would often “bully” herself into pushing through and covering up any “pain” she was feeling for the sake of producing content and maintaining positivity on her platform. She notes: “This left me no room to have human emotions and to have human days. Sometimes there’d be a day where I have to film a video and I’m really sad and I don’t really want to turn on a camera. I don’t have anything to say. But I would say to myself: you have to upload every week. YouTubers upload every week or else they fail” (Chamberlain, 2022, 18:04-18:26). To remain competitive and relevant on online platforms, influencers must stay on top of trends and maintain a consistent presence through regular uploads. However, for influencers whose content is their personality (like Chamberlain), these pressures to consistently post have peculiar psychological ramifications. Chamberlain’s use of the word “human” in the above quotation perfectly illustrates the costs implicit to her job; when self presentation is a commodity for sale, one’s


5


emotionality becomes a part of the commodity in a way that makes it hard to separate online life from physical reality.
Although Emma Chamberlain is primarily known as a “YouTuber,” her particular online presence has undoubtedly shaped the ways in which people become famous online, regardless of the social media platform. Her videos were never about anything particularly novel, but people watched them because they liked her. Built on personality and authentic appeal, her brand has helped invent the influencer mold that exists today; a mold in which one can gain a following based solely on being likable, relatable, and “authentic.”
As social media has evolved and new platforms have emerged, the influencer industry has seen a lot of change (and a lot of growth). Where YouTube’s platform structure mandates a weekly posting schedule to remain relevant, platforms like TikTok encourage new habits and styles of content creation, guided by distinct algorithmic structures. As platform affordances advance, influencers gain more tools for their online “authentic” self presentation and, as such, are able to foster new levels of intimacy with their audiences. But, what kinds of social dilemmas are the next generation of influencers facing as a result?; are they experiencing the levels of burnout that Chamberlain articulates?; what are the theoretical underpinnings that create these dilemmas for influencers?; how do influencers on newer platforms, like TikTok, articulate their own experience of online self presentation and its pressures?; what is the role of authenticity in the unique experiences of influencers?
As aspirations to become an influencer grow among young people, reports of mental health concerns within the industry have become more frequent. Thus, it is pressing that we examine the sustainability of the current influencer mold and its lasting impact on contemporary culture. With the recent emergence of TikTok and all of its freshly “authentic” dwellers, it is


6


crucial that we consider the complex implications produced from a life lived on social media. Accordingly, this research blends theory and practice, through a distinct sociological lens, to investigate the contradictions inherent to the commodified self and its performance of authenticity. Through analysis of TikTok influencers’ self-narrated experiences, this paper considers the status of authenticity in contemporary digital cultures and its relation to the paradox at the heart of 21st century selfhood and America’s culture of personality–the paradox that is authenticity.
The Thirst for Authenticity

In her 2016 article entitled, “Why Millennial Women Crave Authenticity,” marketing manager Juliet Carnoy contends: “Today, more than ever, women want to be their most authentic selves. Whether it’s embracing our natural bodies, refuting the need to be ‘likable’ or considering the possibility that maybe no one truly has it all--women are tired of being manipulated to fit a mold that is shaped by brands for them, and not by them” (Carnoy, 2016). Carnoy’s sentiment reflects the growing awareness and skepticism on the part of consumers in the digital age. The current generation of digital consumers “distrust[s] traditional advertising” because they know that “marketers are trying to sell [them] on impossible ideals” (Carnoy, 2016). Carnoy asserts that millennials are a generation of “digital savvy women who know what’s fake and what’s not,” advising that marketers “celebrate authenticity” if they are looking to resonate with consumers (Carnoy, 2016). Steeped in irony, her recommendation for marketers to use authenticity to disguise their messages to marketing-skeptical audiences–who are supposedly savvy to fakery–illustrates the elusive nature of authenticity in modern consumer culture.
Although there are no official figures, digital marketing experts estimate that the average American encounters between 4,000 and 10,000 ads every single day–a number nearly doubled


7


from figures in 2007 (Simpson, 2017). Heightened exposure to advertising has coincided with an increase in digital engagement, namely through social media platforms. Already steadily growing, social media use increased dramatically with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. A Kantar study published in April 2020, surveying more than 25,000 consumers across 30 markets, revealed that social media engagement increased by 61% over normal usage rates (Kantar, 2020). The principles anchoring Carnoy’s illustration of the digitally-literate, authenticity-craving millennial consumer of 2016 undoubtedly apply to that of the current market. However, as trends in social media use have shifted, consumer demands for authenticity have expanded and evolved in a complementary fashion.
The thirst for authenticity pervades our cultural moment, both reflected in and perhaps subconsciously enforced by the ideological sites in society that are print and digital media.
Authenticity has no doubt emerged as a dominant “buzzword” in the 21st century, positioned as the ultimate goal in terms of psychological well-being, professional success, self presentation, and more. It pervades our self-help books, television shows, and media headlines, but its mere existence is actually quite contested amongst many sociological and philosophical scholars.
Authenticity’s prominence in contemporary culture reflects the entrepreneurial orientation of the modern labor market, as well as the neoliberal underpinnings of hustle culture. In his book, The Society of Singularities, Andreas Reckwitz explains that industrial society’s logic of the general has been replaced by late modernity’s logic of the particular. Cultural goods in modern society are predominantly “singular goods,” evaluated through features like originality and rarity. Rather than fulfill a certain use, cultural-singular goods are expected to be authentic (Reckwitz, 2020, p. 98-99). However, Reckwitz contends that authenticity is so open to interpretation that it has become a sort of “‘empty signifier’...a nearly hollowed-out (and yet widely influential) symbol


8


without any agreed-upon meaning” in late modernity (Reckwitz, 2020, p. 99). As symbols, by definition, depend for their effectiveness on “agreed-upon meanings,” Reckwitz’s claim that authenticity has become an “empty-signifier” points to the ambiguous nature of the ideal and its unattainably aspirational status in contemporary times.
The concept of authenticity has been discussed by scholars in a multitude of realms and in terms of various applications, but the concept is particularly prominent as a guiding logic for self presentation on social media. The value itself hinges on the notion that all humans have an ultimate and absolute “true” self that is accessible and discoverable. From a sociological perspective, though, authenticity is rooted in a paradox. Erving Goffman’s (1952) dramaturgical framework for social interaction insists that an individual’s identity is not a stable entity, but rather one that continuously shifts based on the management of one’s impression upon distinct audience entities (Goffman, 1952, p.13). Claiming that all social interaction is performative, Goffman distinguishes frontstage spaces from backstage spaces. In the “frontstage,” Goffman argues that individuals perform, “in a general and fixed fashion to define the situation for those who observe the performance”(Goffman, 1952, p.13). By contrast, the backstage is inaccessible to the audience; it is the space where performers can step out of character and recuperate from their performance. In the context of social media, the frontstage space is one’s social media presence or profile, which serves as a vehicle for further deliberate performance. Goffman’s framework, however, is particularly aimed at in-person social contexts, in which one continuously presents a version of the self that is tailored to distinct audience entities. This former capacity to compartmentalize social worlds in-person has effectively disintegrated on social media, through increased context collapse as audiences expand indefinitely on these platforms. Thus, one must manage a coherent impression that appeals simultaneously to


9


fragmented audience entities gathered in one fixed setting. Accordingly, it seems that the central discrepancy between the backstage and the frontstage self (the social self) evident in this framework is effectively flattened in the modern social media context, where the self is now primarily social. Sociologists like Erving Goffman and Charles Horton Cooley (1902) agree that the self is an ever-shifting concept, one that is developed through and repeatedly informed by social interaction. Thus, the self-concept, or the way one views themself, is rooted in external perception and performance.
If the self is an unstable concept, though, the notion of a genuine “authentic” self cannot exist as it implies a stable essence within the self. Thus, Reckwitz claims that authenticity in the social world is always a performance of authenticity, “not simply there by nature but is, rather, presented and performed”(Reckwitz, 2020, p. 99). Similarly, Sarah Banet-Weiser (2021) claims that in the modern era of fake news and widespread misinformation, where truth is generally contested, “authenticity means both more and less,” insofar as the mandate to appear authentic has become more urgent “even as we increasingly no longer believe in the concept of the authentic” (Banet-Weiser, 2021, p.142). The digitally-literate, authenticity-craving avatar of Carnoy’s article, mentioned above, seems to recognize the calculated agendas of advertisers in digital spaces, exhibiting an acknowledgement of authenticity’s inconsistencies. However, he/she still searches out a sense of authenticity to justify their purchasing decisions. This contradictory attitude within modern consumerism reflects the pervasive nature of authenticity and its unshakeable impact on contemporary society and post-industrial labor markets. The coveted status of authenticity in relation to identity begs for conceptual attention, insofar as it has lasting implications for younger generations–particularly young generations of social media users. As the term itself continues to be “hollowed-out” (Reckwitz, 2020), it has become increasingly


10


necessary to examine the stability of authenticity as a guiding logic for late modernity’s market of cultural-singular goods.
The Vehicle of Authenticity: Influencers

In terms of the online orientation of this market, social media influencers serve as the primary vehicle through which performed authenticity is packaged and sold to audiences.
Influencers negotiate the complex interplay between a life that is simultaneously bound to the frontstage space of performance and wrapped up in audience demands for the supposed antithesis of performance: authenticity. As influencers’ income and livelihood is dependent on the authentic appeal of their online presence, the paradoxical nature of social media’s authenticity mandate is amplified for them and intensified by economic pressures. Accordingly, they serve as an exemplar, in heightened form, of the contradictions implicit in the logic of authenticity that all modern consumers and social media users experience online.
As social media platforms have evolved and new ones have emerged, the tools for performing authenticity have become more sophisticated. These tools come in the form of advanced platform affordances, which shape the way online communication is facilitated and subsequent audience communities are created. As the newest popular social media platform, TikTok has garnered global attention from brands looking to market their products in an online space where their target customers are engaging daily. Initially testing out the platform’s efficacy in terms of advertising, within the last two years marketers have started to make TikTok a “budget line item,” creating dedicated campaigns for the platform (Maheshwari, 2021). These campaigns are facilitated by TikTok influencers, who disguise the advertorial nature of their branded content and encourage consumerism through their “authentic” appeal. TikTok influencers have risen as incredibly effective vehicles for brands to subtly communicate their


11


marketing messages to consumers. In fact, brands are projected to spend $15 billion on influencer marketing during 2022 (Qudsi, 2022). If social media influencers at large serve as heightened exemplars of the contradictions innate to authenticity and self presentation, TikTok influencers–in particular–face the current state of intensified authenticity demands and, as such, must navigate these demands in relation to their unstable self-concepts. Thus, TikTok influencers provide a foundational access point to investigate the staying power of authenticity in the face of social, cultural, and technological change. Before examining the elements of TikTok influencers’ performance of authenticity and the implications produced from the tensions within that logic, it is important to understand the history of the influencer role, its relation to authenticity, and the remnants of past influencer iterations evident in the newest influencer mold: the TikToker.
Defining The Influencer: Central Tensions

Within the social media landscape, there is a long list of content-creating characters that has evolved and expanded along with the constant development of new social media platforms. Industry vernacular for the bloggers, Instagrammers, TikTokers and other social media users who earn an income from curated digital content, the term “influencer” has risen as one of the most buzzed-about careers in the 21st century. Merriam-Webster defines influencer as “a person who is able to generate interest in something (such as a consumer product) by posting about it on social media.” The role is tightly linked to an ability to sell products, picking up attention from brands worldwide as the lucrative nature of influencer marketing has gained visibility.
In her recent book, Influence: How Social Media Influencers Are Shaping Our Digital Future, Sara McCorquodale (2020) claims that the word influencer is “symbolic of a new kind of media mogul--one who is independent, industrious, and has capitalized on their online popularity to launch further creative projects and successful startups”(McCorquodale, 2020, p. 24).


12


McCorquodale’s use of diction like “capitalize” to define the influencer role reflects central tensions in the function of authenticity within the labor of influencing; it is a means to remunerative ends for influencers, in which they profit off of the strength of their authentic appeal. Insofar as the influencer role is “symbolic,” it reflects certain social, cultural, and economic underpinnings of the 21st century labor market. Attempts to define the role seem to point most chiefly to the cultural composition of Reckwitz’s society of singularities, that is: the performance of authenticity. This tension between inherently performative self-presentation on social media and contradictory audience demands for authenticity is reflected repeatedly in scholars’ efforts to define the term influencer.
An earlier attempt by Karen Freberg (2011) claims influencers represent “a new type of independent third party endorser who shape audience attitudes through blogs, tweets, and use of other social media” (Freberg, 2011, p.6). The term “shape” here similarly connotes a sense of calculation within the role, which contradicts the notion of authenticity as the influencers’ coveted feature altogether. However, influencers’ element of ordinariness continues to pervade definitions of the term, evident in Crystal Abidin’s (2015) definition of influencers as, “everyday, ordinary Internet users who accumulate a relatively large following on blogs and social media through the textual and visual narration of their personal lives and lifestyles, engage with their following in digital and physical spaces, and monetise their following by integrating ‘advertorials’ into their blog or social media posts” (Abidin 2015, p.1). Influencers leverage their ordinary appeal to forge relationships with followers, which they then leverage to monetize their social media presence at large. As definitions of the role have evolved, the significance of audience relationships within this process of monetization becomes increasingly evident.




13


In her book, (Not) Getting Paid To Do What You Love: Gender, Social Media, and Aspirational Work, Brooke Erin Duffy (2017) investigates the pervasive narratives of authenticity, self-expression, and realness that structure aspirational labor within the social media landscape, particularly the “blogosphere.” The fashion bloggers whom she interviews repeatedly articulate the importance of authentic self-expression, pointing to the coveted status of the ideal within 21st century consumer culture. Duffy explores the contradictions in aspirational laborers’ “seemingly incongruous principles of authenticity and profit-making” and the ways in which they get reconciled as “public expressions of the personal self-brand” (Duffy, 2017, p.104). The social media producers in her research consistently frame their “digital activities” as “expressions of ‘realness,’ ‘relatability,’ and/or ‘authenticity’” in an attempt to define themselves against mainstream, traditional media production (Duffy, 2017, p.104 & 133). The language of “realness” and its encompassing terminology is “relationally defined, constructed against an imagined other” by interviewees, reflecting a distinct quality of labor which is anchored by the tensions inherent in the trope of authenticity, i.e., the need to define genuineness against that which is not genuine (Duffy, 2017, p. 133). Sentiments from interviewed bloggers point to the element of realness as more of a means of accessibility– “geographically, aesthetically, and most often, financially” (Duffy, 2017, p. 106). Coded as “relatability to an imagined audience,” the ideal of realness is channeled into interviewee’s digital activities in an effort to “carve out” a niche space for their brands within a densely populated online sphere (Duffy, 2017). As bloggers are the predecessors of the influencers we see today on social media, this paper takes Duffy’s (2017) framework and terminology for the blogosphere and applies it to the work of influencing, investigating the ways these tensions and incongruencies within authentic self-expression and profit making have evolved and expanded. Within the framework Duffy builds, it is clear that the


14


crux of success for bloggers and influencers hinges on their relationships with their audience–and, more so, their relatability to that audience.
Influencer-Audience Relationships: Forged Intimacy

Between influencer and follower, the basis of relationships forged is an illusion of intimacy–one that “thinly veils the consumerist exchange” between the two–based on the influencer’s personal life as “the commodity being traded and vicariously consumed”(Abidin, 2013, p. 4). Research on audience perceptions of intimacy with media personalities dates back, most significantly, to Horton and Wohl’s (1956) theory of parasocial interaction, in which the illusion of face-to-face intimacy is facilitated by the medium of technology. However, parasocial relations are one-directional and hierarchical, as audiences cultivate extensive knowledge of media personalities without any reciprocity involved, making the theory more applicable to audience relationships with television or radio personalities. Influencer-audience relationships are forged on social media platforms, which afford bi-directional communication and reciprocity from the influencer. Through their rampant personal posts, reveals into the “backstage” of their life, and the need to sustain marketable intimacy, influencers engage with their audience in more direct, personal, and (seemingly) authentic ways. Their authentic appeal is intensified by certain social media platform affordances, which enable influencers to appear more accessible than mainstream celebrities or media personalities, enacting a heightened intimacy for audiences, who develop illusions of–not only intimacy, but–friendship.
Thus, in her previous research, Abidin (2013) updates Horton and Wohl’s (1956) terminology to fit the modern digital landscape, developing the concept of “perceived interconnectedness” to describe the intimate sense of attachment some readers feel to online personalities. Although Abidin’s research focuses on commercial lifestyle bloggers and their


15


audience, its foundational findings pertain directly to the relationships forged between influencers and their audiences as well, being that online communication is bi-directional and interactive for both content-creating entities. Perceived interconnectedness is enacted by audiences through the sense of familiarity and closeness they feel to influencers; its facets include audience expectations for immediacy, constancy, exclusivity, intimacy, and quality (Abidin, 2013, p.5). The audience’s illusion of intimacy is a by-product of user expectancies arising from constant communication on social media platforms. As youth communities on social media grew up on the internet, they’ve internalized “certain expectant norms for intimate interaction” (Abidin, 2013, p.5). These expectant norms (immediacy, constancy, exclusivity, intimacy, and quality) are compounded by the digitally-literate, authenticity-craving qualities of the 21st century social media consumer. Their recognition of the calculated, profit-oriented agendas implicit in influencers’ performance of authenticity heightens labor for influencers, insofar as they must work even harder to uphold their authentic appeal in order to sustain the illusion of closeness with their audience–and in turn, sustain their notoriety and longevity in the industry. This work is a form of emotional labor, in which influencers continuously perform their personality, commodifying the self into a sort of “human brand,” and interact with followers to give the impression of intimacy. The intricacies involved in this kind of labor result in social tensions in the laborers’ personal lives (Abidin, 2013, p.1). Before analyzing these sociological ramifications in relation to audience demands for authenticity on social media, it is important to understand the history of emotional labor in order to hypothesize about its evolved status for influencers on contemporary social media platforms.
Toward Authenticity Burnout: Influencer Emotional Labor and Its Implications





16


In her book “The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling,” Arlie Hochschild (1983) comments on the rise of authenticity in relation to the commercialization of human feeling and subsequent emotional labor market. She notes that “a private emotional system has been subordinated to commercial logic and it has been changed by it” (Hochschild, 1983, p. 186). Hochschild emphasizes a sort of reactive dynamism (Salisbury & Pooley, 2017) that anchors the notion of authenticity, insofar as the culture’s increased value placed on authentic or “natural” feeling has “increased dramatically with the full emergence of its opposite–the managed heart”(Hochschild, 1983, p. 190). In contrast to sincerity-focused societies of the past, the authenticity-oriented modern audience has become “bored with duplicity,” which has become too “ordinary and unsurprising” (Hochschild, 1983, p. 191). This added value on unmanaged feeling contributed to a “market intrusion into the ways we define ourselves,” insofar as emotional labor and physical labor are both subject to the rules of mass production (Hochschild, 1983).
As previously stated, influencers conduct emotional labor through routine performance of their personality on social media. The commercial audience in this online social sphere, then, demands a more abstract product: a product that is “a smile, a mood, a feeling, or a relationship,” which Hochschild claims belongs “more to the organization and less to the self” (Hochschild, 1983, p. 198). Thus, the public celebration of individualism and authenticity has subjected the modern self to “privately wonder, without tracing the question to its deepest social roots: What do I really feel?” (Hochschild, 1983, p. 198). As the influencer commodifies his/her personality and emotionality within a commercial logic through the performance of authenticity, his/her identity becomes so intertwined with the emotional labor demanded by the market that complex costs are imposed upon the self-concept. These costs manifest themselves within the emotional


17


psyche of the influencer, who has a limited ability to detach from his/her online persona. This distinct mingling of self with the labor intrinsic to the job of being an influencer provides the foundation for investigating potential psychological implications of the job.
Moreover, influencers seemingly exist as “human brands,” marked by the distinct mingling of performance, authenticity, and labor. Bruhn et al. (2012) investigated consumer perceptions of brand authenticity as it relates to consumer goods companies. The researchers developed a scale for measuring the strength of this perception, in which authenticity was found to be a four dimensional construct, comprehensively consisting of (1) continuity, (2) originality,
(3) reliability, and (4) naturalness (Bruhn et al., 2012, p. 569). Although the study’s conceptual framework is oriented specifically towards authenticity in the context of brands that deal with physical market offerings (products), its core findings evidently speak to consumer perceptions and demands for authenticity in brands at large–including the human brand: influencers. Additionally, the commodified market space that influencers occupy further validates the legitimacy of this direct framework translation, as both consumer goods brands and human brands are wrapped up in the same market demands for authenticity.
Each of the four dimensions of Bruhn et. al’s study points to the paradoxical nature of authenticity, as consumer judgments of authenticity strength prompt relational calculations on the part of the brand. The audience’s demand for coherent, novel, trustworthy, and organic features in authentic brands contradicts the very notion of authenticity as a genuine ideal altogether. In the case of social media influencers, then, it follows that authenticity is instinctively performed in adherence to similarly strict and contradictory audience demands. However, the distinguishable quality of the human brand exists in the fact that their audience’s particular call for authenticity–one that is measured in relation to coherence and reliability–counteracts both the


18


foundational logic of Goffman’s unstable self enrolled in ongoing self-concept revision, as well as the primarily lucrative ends they are after. Influencer’s, thus, face a peculiar dilemma within the labor market–a dilemma that is anchored by the tension between contradictory models of Goffmanesque selfhood that exist at either end of the paradox between performance and authenticity online. Audience demands for brand authenticity on social media are simply unattainable on the part of the influencer, who is continuously performing. Thus, the influencer must enroll in ongoing emotional labor,–mitigating negative emotions and concealing latent profit-oriented motivations–which is taxing on the self-concept, in an attempt to match these authenticity demands. Heightened by the considerable overlap of influencers’ self-concept with their job, these unrealistic pressures may manifest into a distinct form of fatigue, more commonly described as burnout (Freudenberger, 1975). There exists a prominent contradiction between growing audience demands for authenticity on social media and the Goffmanesque model of selfhood posited in the literature of performance. Accordingly, burnout caused from emotional labor on social media can be directly linked to this contradiction and its encompassing logic. In fact, influencer burnout may be more accurately described as authenticity burnout due its distinguishable characteristics. Analysis of the tensions anchoring authenticity burnout provides insight into the stability of authenticity as a guiding logic within the online sphere of social media, as well as the potential psychological implications its pressures produce for influencers.
The Rise of TikTok: Emotional Labor’s Evolving Stage

The market orientation of emotional labor has drastically shifted from the 1983 landscape of Hochschild’s thesis. In fact, in their revisitation of Hochschild’s conceptual framework, Steinberg and Figart (1999) express the need for research into the coming evolution of emotional


19


labor in the 21st century. As the public-private distinction of our service economy further blurs, the scholars express a need for deep reflection upon “the moral, and even social, consequences of our ever more sophisticated tools for inauthentic authenticity” in research (Steinberg & Figart, 1999, p. 23). Insofar as authenticity is now better understood by users as calculated authenticity on social media, audience’s authenticity demands are more intense, making it necessary for influencers to conduct heightened forms of emotional labor. The rapid evolution of social media platforms within the last decade seems to illustrate the development of increasingly sophisticated tools for “inauthentic authenticity.”
These tools come in the form of advanced platform affordances, which have shaped the way online communication is facilitated, enacting distinct forms of user connectivity and new expectant norms within audience entities. As new social media platforms surface, they carve out their niche in the sphere through appeals to authenticity, “defining themselves, openly or implicitly, against legacy services’ inauthenticity”(Salisbury & Pooley, 2017, p.2). The newest popular social media platform, TikTok, echoes the reactive nature of platform authenticity, insofar as its promotional materials claim emphatically that it is a place for authenticity, marked by the slogan: “Real People. Real Videos.” In 2018, ByteDance merged its platforms Musical.ly and TikTok, creating an international version of the company’s short-video product with inherited access to youth markets abroad (Kaye, Chen, & Zeng, 2020). The emergence of TikTok reflects a turning point in the framework of emotional labor, as the platform gives way to new forms of content creation and influencer-audience interaction.
TikTok has attracted unprecedented audience adoption, with 689 million daily users (DataReportal, 2021). While scholarship on TikTok is still in its early stages, existing research focuses on critical analyses of the platform through a variety of perspectives, such as cultural


20


production, circulation of health content, and digital structure. Zulli & Zulli (2020) contend that TikTok is “unlike any other social media platform” (Zulli & Zulli, 2020, p.2). In terms of popular content patterns, TikTok shares most similarities with the now-obsolete platform Vine, which allowed users to post short videos (up to six seconds) recorded within the app. However, as of July 2021, TikTok allows videos up to three minutes in length, enables video editing within the app, provides hundreds of sounds and effects, and prompts users to engage with content more than interpersonal connections (Zulli et al. 2020, p. 2). Additionally, TikTok’s homepage, termed the “For You” page, reflects a unique structure of recommendations; content on this page is algorithmically curated to correspond with a user’s interests and engagement habits, rather than structured around one’s interpersonal network of peers. The labor of content creation on TikTok is significantly heightened, insofar as many popular TikTokers post more frequently on the app than they do on any other platform–some even posting up to 50 videos per day. In this way, TikTok’s algorithmic and aesthetic structure emphasizes and amalgamates some of the most extreme affordances of other popular social media platforms. For the purposes of my project’s distinct theoretical approach, TikTok represents both the current state of audience demands for authenticity in content creation at large, as well as the state of influencer emotional labor in this distinct digital moment.
Previously mentioned, Abidin’s original concept of “perceived interconnectedness” encapsulates influencers’ engagement with their followers as an attempt to give the impression of “exclusive, intimate exchange” (Abidin, 2015, p.5). As social media platforms have evolved and developed, platform affordances for influencer self expression and audience engagement have advanced as well. Sara McCorquodale (2020) notes the launch of Instagram’s “Stories” functionality in 2016 as a significant shift in the platforms’ highly-criticized platform logic


21


which previously encouraged more aesthetically “perfect” self portrayals on the app’s main grid. The “Stories” affordance changed the way influencers use Instagram, allowing users to publish seemingly impromptu-style images and videos that stay live for only twenty-four hours. Thus, as platform affordances have evolved, it is clear that audience demands for content have extended further into the “backstage” realm of influencers’ identities and daily lives.
Stream-of-consciousness style functionalities, like Instagram Stories, provide more advanced tools for direct communication with audiences, allowing influencers to maintain “continual and reliable presences in their audience’s lives” (McCorquodale, 2020, p.30). However, as Abidin notes, the pressures of sustaining perceived interconnectedness result in certain “social tensions” in influencer’s personal lives: “immediacy (need for short response time), constancy (need for responses around the clock), exclusivity (need for personalized attention and responses), intimacy (need to foster feeling of familiarity), and quality(need to produce thoughtful responses)” (Abidin, 2015, p.9). These tensions reflect both the impact of advanced platform affordances and the impact of heightened audience demands for authenticity on influencers’ psyche and self-concept–all of which point to the eventual manifestation of authenticity burnout (previously mentioned). As a form of fatigue that results from the complex contradictions between performance and authenticity at the heart of social media self presentation, authenticity burnout is further compounded by the social tensions produced from fostering perceived interconnectedness.
As a short-form creative video platform, TikTok exhibits evolved forms of content creation which seem to reflect an advanced ability for influencers to foster perceived interconnectedness with their audience. With new tools for performing authenticity comes new rubrics for judging the strength of authenticity, on the part of audiences. Thus, TikTok’s


22


particular platform affordances enact creator-user interactions that seem to function within a heightened emotional labor market, in which the influencer’s ability to foster impressions of intimacy is enhanced. Scholars concur that the platform’s distinctive technical structure and rapid user adoption provides an imperative to theorize if and how the platform “redefines the nature of online networks” (Zulli et al., 2020). Communicative processes enabled by platform affordances enact distinct forms of sociality in online spaces. Through observing its digital features, layout, and platform logic, Zulli et al.’s analysis of TikTok’s infrastructure demonstrates a promotion of mimesis and imitation as the basis of the app’s sociality. They define TikTok’s distinct user connectivity and community as one of “imitation publics,” referring to a collection of people whose digital connectivity is constituted through the shared ritual of content imitation and replication (Zulli et al. 2020, p.11). This imitation plays out in the form of trends, in which certain sounds, effects, dances, hashtags, topics, etc. go viral, enacting reproduction and imitation on the part of users. One possible explanation offered for the prevalence of imitation on TikTok exists in Zulli & Zulli’s citation of Nick Couldry’s (2003) term “liveness,” which refers to a form of transmission that guarantees a potential connection to shared social realities as they are happening (Zulli et al. 2020, p.11). TikTok actualizes this liveness through in-app editing capabilities that make video creation relatively immediate, generating a sense of potential eventfulness for users to engage with. Additionally, this imitation is tied to user profitability, insofar as metrics of engagement are made particularly visible on the app (Zulli et al. 2020).
TikTok explicitly informs users of how many followers, videos, and likes they need to qualify for their brand partnering service, termed “TikTok Creator Marketplace.” This heightened visibility implicitly crafts an audience of aspirational influencers, who engage with content acknowledging that they too can profit from making similar videos.


23


TikTok’s logic of imitation has lasting implications in terms of emotional labor and authenticity. As influencers’ tools for fostering intimacy with their audiences have become more sophisticated, so too have tools for performing authenticity. This correlation, however, locks influencers within a sort of feedback loop in which audience demands for authenticity become more stringent when content is both more immediate and feels more intimate. Audience demands on TikTok are further compounded by users’ aspirational perspective, which is crafted by affordances that heighten the visibility of engagement metrics on the platform. Attune to their own capacity for fame and profit on the app, TikTok users interact with influencers in a distinct way that reflects a shared awareness of both the artificial components of performed authenticity and the economic underpinnings of content creation.
In terms of authenticity burnout, TikTok represents both the current state of audience demands for authenticity in social media content at large and the heightened pressures of emotional labor for influencers in a marketplace where the performance of authenticity is itself an abstract commodity for sale. The latest embodiment of the influencer avatar, the “TikToker,” faces a peculiarly novel audience community of authenticity-savvy, aspirationally-inclined consumers, who are enrolled in artifice detection, constantly trying to search out and expose the inauthentic. The idiosyncrasies of TikTok’s distinctive user community and connectivity provide a warrant to investigate the sociological ramifications of emotional labor on the platform, particularly in relation to TikTokers’ self-concepts. Inherently subjective in nature though, these implications and their psychological manifestations can only be articulated by TikTok influencers themselves. Thus, their individual experiences and perspectives are essential to any form of speculation within this realm.
Methodology



24


This small-scale interpretive study draws on three in-depth, semi-structured, qualitative interviews with female-identifying TikTok lifestyle influencers, each representing a different scale of popularity as indicated by their following quantity on the platform. My research design and interview protocol underwent approval by the Institutional Review Board of Muhlenberg College’s Media & Communication department in early February 2022. Subjects were chosen based on loose criteria. I used an informal selection process, in which I created a “burner” account on TikTok –untraceable to my identity– and began following lifestyle influencers I had known of, followed on my personal account, or found through the “suggested” function on TikTok. Lifestyle influencers are those who create content based around their everyday activities and interests. They are relatable to followers because their content focuses on how they manage daily ordinary activities, filming their personal processes and routines. They often make
vlog-style videos, in which they detail their opinions on certain topics or give advice to followers. Within the larger category of lifestyle influencers, individuals often frame their lifestyle content or brand around a main passion or interest that drives their daily life, e.g., fashion, health, music, etc., intentionally or unintentionally carving out a niche. After following around 10 TikTok influencers with similar lifestyle-centered content, I let the algorithm do the rest of the work for me. My burner account’s “For You” page was quickly filled with content from more lifestyle influencers, who I then added to my full potential recruitment sample.
To control for an expectedly low response rate, I created a spreadsheet with information, including following count and contact information, on a total of 56 potential subjects. These potential subjects reflected a wide scale of popularity, ranging from 5,000 to 3 million followers. All potential subjects created vlog-style TikTok videos, centered around “lifestyle” content with a variety of niches within that category. Additionally, all potential subjects had done at least one


25


partnership with a brand, indicating they have made some sort of income from their content on TikTok; paid brand partnerships were used as a metric to delineate the difference between TikTok influencers (TikTokers) and TikTok users.
I recruited subjects by reaching out through their publicly listed email accounts. Potential subjects with no publicly listed contact information were removed from the sample, yielding a final recruitment sample of 28 potential influencers. Influencers were offered a $25 Amazon gift card as an incentive for their participation in the interview. After sending emails to the full sample, I heard back from three TikTokers, indicating an interest in participating. As soon as each participant agreed to be interviewed, I started to conduct daily observations of their TikTok accounts, monitoring content styles and audience interactions. My goal was to understand their communicative practices, self-branding strategies, and audience interactions before meeting with them to conduct the interviews. All three semi-structured interviews took place on Zoom and lasted from 30-45 minutes.
Questions (included in appendix) were developed to address participants’ understanding of their performance of authenticity on TikTok; audience interactions and relationships; use of TikTok-specific affordances; implications of influencer emotional labor; online and offline interactions with followers; content creation processes and strategy; and reflections on monetized elements of the job, among others. As discussed in my literature review, influencers are enrolled in constant performance to maintain authenticity within their branded selves. They live highly visible lives and, as such, are accustomed to a level of daily performance. Thus, my research raises reflexivity concerns related to visibility and anonymity. Taking this into account, interview participants were repeatedly reminded that their insights would remain anonymous. As my research is heavily motivated by an understanding of the “backstage” realm of the self as it


26


intersects with authenticity demands, my goal was to minimize any effort, on the part of participants, to answer questions in a manner that aligns with their branded, frontstage persona. However, it will become evident that this kind of performative coherence is hard to shake–most notably for the influencer with the largest following out of my sample. While I am not suggesting participants’ self-narrated sentiments are inaccurate or untruthful, I am suggesting that they are most likely structured by impression management that is inherently steeped in commercial interests. Not only have the contradictions and tensions anchoring performance and authenticity shaped the contours of the interview experience for both the participant and the researcher, but they have also become central to the way I have contextualized the interviews.
For clarity purposes, I use pseudonyms in the place of TikTokers’ names when referring to self-descriptions. The term “influencer” is used to refer to interviewees throughout the data
analysis, regardless of the participants’ self-definition. Additionally, quotations have been lightly edited for purposes of clarity; filler words such as “um” and “like” have been removed for concision and readability.
The interviews underwent several rounds of thematic, textual analysis. I noticed several commonalities in sentiments expressed by influencers, as well as largely diverging opinions which I correlated to variations in follower quantity within the sample. Several key themes, discussed below, emerged from my examination of the interviews. Lacking diversity and magnitude, my data does not allow for the possibility of generalization, but it is nuanced and adds to the growing literature on the socio-cultural and economic underpinnings of influencer labor on TikTok–a platform still in its infancy. Additionally, my findings offer insight into the daily life of TikTok influencers, their unique audience interactions, the ways they manage emotions related to the labor of the job, and interesting contrasts in perspective as related to


27


variance in following. Through textual analysis, I loosely apply the theoretical frameworks, set up thus far, to themes within the influencer interviews as a means of investigating the structural underpinning of their experiences. Interspersed with explicit connections to existing research and terminology, my data analysis is primarily focused on the implications of influencers’
self-expressions and the ways in which they point to certain costs imposed upon the self-concept as a result of the impossible nature of authenticity demands on social media–particularly, on TikTok.
Data Analysis: Process and Context

To analyze data from the interviews, I framed my process around steps suggested and demonstrated by other scholars doing ethnographic work in this field. The first step was to check the transcripts for accuracy and clean up any miswordings. I then transferred the responses into a spreadsheet, organized by interview question and topic. Responses were analyzed through a loose thematic coding process, in which I close-read each of the individual responses, noting key concepts and tropes that repeated. I then cross-analyzed the relationship between the most prominent concepts repeated across interviewees’ responses. My data analysis process yielded three main themes with more specific tropes evident in each: (1) the use of discourses of destiny and authenticity as key components of sustaining a following as a TikTok influencer, (2) TikTok influencers’ ability to foster heightened illusions of intimacy with their audience through platform affordances and the implications of these audience relationships, and (3) TikTok influencers’ loss of leisure social media consumption and the implications of influencers’ relentless content-production mindset.
The three influencers I interviewed each identify their TikTok content as their brands, with various descriptions within this designation. However, they each reflect a distinct level of


28


popularity as measured by their follower quantity on TikTok. Analysis of the interviews will show that TikTokers’ self-descriptions reflect interesting contrasts in perspective, linked to one’s “size” in terms of following and audience engagement on the platforms. Indeed, the sample reflects three distinct TikTok influencer perspectives: the aspirational influencer’s(Anna), the part-time influencer’s(Molly), and the full-time influencer’s(Jen). Collectively, their
self-descriptions provide comprehensive and nuanced insights into the durability of authenticity within influencer emotional labor on TikTok.
Full-time influencer Jen has the largest following out of the sample, with a total of 444.1K on TikTok at the time of the interview. She describes her content as being “at the crossroads between lifestyle and comedy. It has a lot of advice. It’s very self serving and inspirational, a lot about self confidence and positivity.” Part-time influencer Molly, who holds a full-time corporate job and does “the influencer thing” on the side, describes her content as “very health, wellness, and lifestyle.” Her platform is somewhere in the middle of the popularity scale, with 134.5K TikTok followers at the time of the interview. Self-identified as a “micro-influencer that wants to just be a lifestyle creator,” aspirational influencer Anna has a full-time corporate job and the smallest audience size out of my sample, with 6,247 TikTok followers at the time of her interview. While relatively arbitrary, the influencers are delineated in this way (i.e., full-time, part-time, and aspirational) for purposes of clarity and pattern-recognition within my analysis.
Interview Analysis

Defining the TikToker: Discourses of Destiny and Authenticity

When asked about the growth of their TikTok accounts, each influencer articulated a pattern in which they joined the app as everyday users, had a few videos go viral on the “For You” page, and then began steadily growing through a variety of tactics, which will be discussed

