                               








     		 

The Hows and Whys of Content Management













a publication of
digital firefly
marketing










Introduction to Content Marketing


What is Content Marketing?
Content marketing is the process of creating video, articles, ebooks, how-to guides, social media updates, picture galleries, infographs, webinars, or other forms of media about your business or brand. Creating content, posting it on your website, then promoting it via social media, Google search and pay- per-click brings traffic to your website. The more people who come to your website, the more likely they are to buy from you, give you their email as a lead, or follow your busi- ness on Facebook, Twitter or Pinterest.








The real beauty of content marketing is that it can create a snowball effect for your website. For example, let’s say your website sells plates, cups, etc., so you write a blog called “How to set a table.” Once the blog is published and pushed out via email mar- keting and social media, amazing things start to happen. First, people begin to visit your site. They may not come in droves immediately, but you will start to see an increase in traffic as social media does its early magic. Then, Google indexes your page, so when people search “How to set a table” you may appear on the first or second page of results, and continue to get visits even after the social media buzz of the post has died down.


Content marketing at its core is about creating assets for your website that people can use over and over again. What makes it effective is that the increased traffic of potential buyers will continue as it lives on forever thanks to Google searches.


The Beauty of it All
The beauty of content marketing comes down to its cost. It’s pretty cheap. The cost can usually be borne in one of two ways—either existing employees are charged with writing blogs or creating videos, making the additional costs minimal. Another option is to hire out to a firm specializing in content marketing, either on a project basis or on a monthly retainer. If you decide to hire one of these companies, you will usually end up spending anywhere from $1,500 per month up to $12,000, depending on the amount of content that needs to be produced.


While that may sound expensive, it can be quite efficient in comparison to other forms of marketing. For example, hiring a PR firm can cost $10,000 a month, Google AdWords can easily be in the thousands of dollars, and direct mail, TV and newspaper ads are all also relatively expensive. One entrepreneur recently featured in the Sunday business section of the New York Times reports spending $290,000 on newspaper ads.

Lastly, while you pay for every mailing and every TV spot, you don’t pay for every visit to your site via Google search. A blog you wrote a year ago can still bring you a great deal of traffic; and that traffic is free!






Not only is content marketing relatively inexpensive, but
it can also create a much better user experience. Tradi- tional advertising is based on distraction. Advertisers want a user to become aware of the ad by distracting them.
For example, creating a TV ad during a show, or send- ing a piece of direct mail among their other bills and letters, or creating a pop-up ad on a site are all ways to distract someone from their current activity

Content marketing, on the other hand, is based on in- tent and is similar to advertis- ing in the Yellow Pages. You start by creating pertinent content that people are looking for and want to read. In this manner you end up having their complete and undivided attention—and aren’t distracting them from their day-to-day routine.










Know Your Brand



How should you start a content marketing strategy? Like any marketing strategy, two factors need to be considered:

What are you selling?	Who is your audience?







Knowing what you sell is the easiest to an- swer if you are a retailer, but can be a little bit trickier if you are selling business-to-busi- ness. If you are a retailer you should look at your store and ask what’s your inventory?
Are you selling things that are niche or more general items?




Consider Blogging About This
You Sell This









Fair Trade Coffee
Benefits of a French Press
Why Itallians like their Espresso Your Local Coffee Shop Coffee Shop Horror Stories
How to make the perfect Mocha
If you sell golf clubs and lessons, what you are really selling is golf services, so the content you create should be centered around golf. If you are selling espresso cof- fee equipment, then you need to think about creating content around the proper use of coffee equipment to make the per- fect espresso. You need to make sure the content is useful and informative to your consumers.


While retailers have a straightforward approach to creating content, business-to-business services can be a bit confusing and hard to pin down. However, the best thing to do here is to discuss your industry. For example, Hubspot is a company that provides software for business to create and manage digital marketing. So in order to promote their company via content marketing, they create a great deal of content around the digital marketing industry. They write blogs about Facebook and email marketing, have webinars about blogging for business, and do infographs about all things digital.



If you are business-to-business and choose to create your own content, the same kind of rules apply to you as they would business to consumer; create content around your indus- try, focusing on your expertise. Here are some easy to follow steps to give your content creation a boost.

1	the hows and whys of content management and production
Once you have figured out what you are selling and who you are selling to, it’s time to start creating a funnel. The reason we create a funnel is to develop pieces of content that map to each part of the sales cycle, mak- ing sure we are providing useful content to each of our buyer types. The typical funnel we see looks something like this:








What is it? Who are you?
AWARENESS
Blog Articles, Ads, Web Banners, PR, Customer Content, Likes, Tweets, Pins


Who needs it and why?    	


How would it be useful to me

Interested Buyers

EDUCATIONAL OFFERS
“How To” books, Videos, Nurturing Emails

What are the consequences of 	 NOT having it?


What are my options?



Why should I choose you?
VALIDATION OFFERS
Coupons and Special Offers, Targeted Emails based on Lead’s Data



SALES OFFERS
Offer more while in line, Additional Products

                                                                the hows and whys of content management and production

At the top of the funnel are people who have no idea about you or your business, Because they are totally unaware of what you do, we want to use marketing to introduce your service to these people.



Once consumers become aware of your business, they will try and figure
out if they need it and why. Why do I need to pay you for golf lessons? Why is your coffee better than someone else’s? Here you want to educate people on why your brand or business is something they
need.


After you have convinced a person that they can’t live without your service, you need to get them over the finish line—and to the cash register. At this point, you
can offer them content like coupons, sweepstakes, etc., to give them extra incentive to buy.



Finally, once a person has committed to purchase, make sure to continually engage them and en- courage them to buy more of your product. As
a lead or prospect moves through the sales cycle, content marketing uses different forms of content to drive them farther and
farther down the funnel. In order to map where the content goes in the funnel, it’s important to first know what con-
tent you have and what content you need to create.

2	the hows and whys of content management and production
No business starts out empty handed in the way of con- tent. Every business has some- thing that they use to help sell their product or service. It could be an advertisement in a newspaper, a flyer, or pic- tures from an event. Anything that can be digitized or is already in digital format such as pictures, can be used as a piece of content marketing.

One of the first things to do is a content audit. What have you or your employees cre- ated that has been success- ful? Does anyone have an awesome PowerPoint presen- tation or video from his or her presentation? Are their pic- tures from a company event?

Once there is a list of the content you own, you need to start mapping it back to your sales process.

the hows and whys of content management and production
Map your content to the buying cycle.
Now that you have created the funnel and a list of all your content, it’s time to map each piece of content back to the funnel. This way, no matter where a lead is in the sales process, you can give them a piece of content that moves them along.

The first stage of the funnel is when customers are un- aware of your company so they need to discover and understand your brand. This is known as brand aware-
ness. Content that helps raise brand awareness are blogs that can be found via search engines, social media market- ing shared through likes, pins and tweets, and paid adver- tisement such as AdWords
or banner ads. You want to
ensure you have a blog on your website along with social media pages on Facebook and Twitter that you update at least 20 times a month to keep your brand within the

useful content for users who stumble upon your site. You

this point as well to keep peo- ple aware of what services you are providing.


The second stage of the funnel is your chance to show your expertise to the prospect. In this stage you will want to share case studies, perform webinars, share customer testimonials, as well as share your pricing. Some of this content may live behind an email form. For example, you may not want to send out case studies without getting an email address (aka: a lead) from someone. It’s up to you to decide whether or not the content needs to live behind a form or if it’s valuable enough for someone to give you his or her email address.
Typically we see ebooks, webinars, and demos live behind forms, while blogs and other content are available to the public. However, the other content that is avail- able should have forms leading to the next phase in the funnel. For example if they are looking at pricing they probably are more interested in buying than someone just reading your blog. A form asking you for a quote would be something to put in this stage of the funnel.


Now you’ve reached the third stage. Once people are ready to purchase, you need to make it easy for them to do so! Creating a cart or a detailed product suite where people can pick and choose is a great way to get product out the door. You could also use mega sites like Amazon that can sell it as a third party.







Lastly, now that they have purchased something, how can you get them to buy more? Sending out emails showing usage and how you might be bumping up against the limit along with new products that are similar to what they just bought are great ways to use content to have people buy again.


the hows and whys of content management and production
Create an Editorial Calendar
Now that you have all of your content inventoried and you have a funnel that is mapped out, you will have a better understanding of what content still needs to be created.

The best thing to do is to start with a goal, usually 3 months out. For example, maybe you want to have a huge Holiday Season or Father’s day. Maybe you are a business that wants to reach a certain amount of subscribers online. Starting with a goal lets you work backwards in terms of planning and theme.

Next, create a calendar and use a project manage- ment system, such as Basecamp. If you know that you need to blog twice a week to get “x” number of sales on Christmas, then you need to put each
of those blogs on your calendar so you know when they need to be written.

December Blogs



















Feel Free to Share

16



Now you have to do what most people dread…actually create content. It’s not as arduous as people think. It’s OK to be flexible about your subject mate- rial. Read blogs and news in your category and industry for inspiration on what blogs to write, what offers may make sense, and what webinars to perform. But be sure to always create original and useful content. Secondly, don’t make it the responsibility of just one person. This is a case of many hands making the workload lighter, so encourage employees to contribute to the blog and to the social media account. Use one person as a gatekeeper to keep the content
in the same voice and provide some editing help, but having more employees writing blogs is a great way to build a lot of content very quickly.





Social Media Updates by Sean




Infographs by Marissa


Blogs by John













Feel Free to Share

Press Releases by Tim
Videos by Rony




Kill two birds with one stone—if you are doing a presentation or webinar, record it! There are a lot of programs available for both Macs and PCs which allow you to record from the screen. Once you have the file, you can upload it to YouTube and embed the YouTube player onto your website. Voilà!

Don’t feel like you always need to be serious or on brand. Show
your workplace culture by showing dogs in the office, big employee news, company BBQs and any other fun event that will show people more of your company than just your products.


You Tube






























Use software such as Basecamp as a repository of ideas so that if you are stuck for a blog article, you can turn to the idea repository to get a quick blog out the door.


Take content and use it in another form. If you have a great presentation about your indus- try, it’s pretty easy to turn it into a blog. Or if you wrote a great how-to blog, create a quick YouTube video that you can embed on your site to show the actual process in action.
Recycling your content is a great way to reach a broader audience.


Lastly, a tried and true way of creating content is to do a survey using services like Survey Monkey, then turning the content and results into a blog. For example, maybe you do a sur- vey on top 5 gift ideas for Mom on Mother’s day. Once you get the results you write a blog called, Top 5 gifts for Mom on Mother’s day (which is a highly searched term right before Mother’s day) simply by providing the results of your survey. Getting that information on your website can attract people looking for a specific gift.


                                                 the hows and whys of content management and production


Push out your Content
Once you create this content you need to make sure people become aware of it. This is when you use differ- ent channels for different points in the funnel and on the website to make
people start to sit up and take notice. Don’t be upset if the content only brings in a trickle of traffic at first— it’s out in the world wide web and will often keep on giving.



The content will need keywords so that Google can index it properly. Use the Google key- words tool and insight tool to research what keywords people are searching for and whether or not that word is competitive. You want to choose keywords that are low to medium in competition, but still have a lot of searches. This is a passive strategy as it will depend on people searching for those keywords and arriving at your website, but avoids getting buried on Google Search.


                                                                the hows and whys of content management and production

Use your social media to share YouTube videos, new offers, news, blogs, etc. Always make sure you include a link back to the site so people can arrive on your site rather than staying on Facebook, Twitter or Pinterest.

















Email is a great channel to use in all phas- es of marketing. Setting up an email form on your blog allows visitors to receive new content automatically when its published. Using lead nurturing can ensure you de- liver offers to people in the right cycle. For example, if a lead looked at your pricing page, it might be beneficial to send them a special offer or some customer testimoni- als.

If you have some budget left over, using Pay-Per-Click and press releases are great options to drive content traffic to your site.
Feel Free to Share

21










Keeping Content Fresh

Write Two Blogs and call Google in the Morning.

In June of 2010, Google released Google Caffeine, which can be argued has had more of an effect on websites than either Google Panda or Penguin. Google Caffeine was an update to the way Google indexes sites, because when you actually search Google you don’t search the web, you search Google’s index, while Panda and Penguin are updates to how Google ranks your website.

Prior to the change, Google had layers of indexes that were updated at different rates, with the main index being updated every few weeks. So if you ranked highly in the main index, you didn’t have to do anything to keep your new ranking because the index didn’t change very often. This is why SEO was actually pretty important, you changed a few things and added some links and then BAM you were in the top ten for a good long time.

Caffeine upended that SEO strategy, because now the Google index is updated in real time. As content becomes available, it can be indexed quite quickly by Google and ap- pear in the Google search index, pushing people out of the top ten sooner rather than later as the index updates very quickly.






The second change Google made is called Google Freshness. This change is related to the page ranking Google uses to rank websites for each search from one to infinity. The change to algorithm looks for the freshest content on a subject, so if someone Googles “NFL scores” the most recent update on NFL scores is shown.

This means that a site that may not have the highest page rank but the freshest content on a subject, may be ranked higher in the results for a small amount of time. Due to these changes, its imperative that site owners keep updating their sites to maintain their rankings within Google. This content must be original in nature and not a simple pull of aggregated content; using strategies like blogging, picture galleries, social media updates, comments and customer reviews will keep your site fresh. Websites that don’t stay fresh will slowly lose search rankings over time.


Conclusion
Content marketing is a not only an inexpen- sive and easy way to get traffic to your web- site, it is also an effective tactic. Like exercise, or taking vitamins, you have to do a little bit every day to get the desired effect. However, unlike exercise you can hire someone to do the job for you. Like any forms of marketing, whether you do it yourself or hire an agency, being aligned with sales is of utmost impor- tance. If your content doesn’t point people in the direction of sales, then the likelihood the content will result in sales will be minimal. Con- tent marketing in lockstep with a sales pro- cess becomes a powerful tool to market your brand and website and drive leads and sales.









Contact
If you are looking for help for your business’s
content marketing, please contact us for your free evaluation

@digitalfirefly1 www.facebook.com/digital.firefly.marketing info@digitalfireflymarketing.com
(609) 472-0750
