TRACKING AND ANALYSIS
20.1 INTRODUCTION Picture the scene: You’ve opened up a new fashion retail outlet in the trendiest shopping centre in town. You’ve spent a small fortune on advertising and branding. You’ve gone to great lengths to ensure that you’re stocking all of the prestigious brands. Come opening day, your store is inundated with visitors and potential customers. And yet, you are hardly making any sales. Could it be because you have one cashier for every hundred customers? Or because the smell of your freshly painted walls chases customers away before they complete a purchase? While it can be difficult to isolate and track the factors affecting your revenue in this fictional store, move it online and you have a wealth of resources available to assist you with tracking, analysing, and optimising your performance. To a marketer, the internet offers more than just new avenues of creativity. By its very nature, it allows you to track each click to your site and through your site. It takes the guesswork out of pinpointing the successful elements of a campaign; it can show you very quickly what’s not working. It all comes down to knowing where to look, what to look for, and what to do with the information you find. At the beginning of this book, you learned how important it is for a business to direct its actions through carefully designed strategy and planning. There are two factors that not only inform key business decisions for strategy, but also provides the needed evidence and support to substantiate them. These are data-driven insights and customer/client focus. Throughout the chapters, you have also learned about a few of the forms and sources of data, each highlighting the elements that you should track to measure the success of a particular area of digital marketing. Now you’re going to learn more specifics about data analytics and how to analyse the data you’ve gathered
20.3 WORKING WITH DATA In the days of traditional media, actionable data was a highly desired but scarce commodity. While it was possible to broadly understand consumer responses to marketing messages, it was often hard to pinpoint exactly what was happening, and why. In the digital age, information is absolutely everywhere. Every single action taken online is recorded, which means there is an incredible wealth of data available to marketers to help them understand when, where, how, and even why users react to their marketing campaigns. This also means there is a responsibility on marketers to make data-driven decisions that inform tactics and plans. Assumptions and gut feel are not enough; you need to back these up with solid facts and clear results. Don’t worry if you’re not a ‘numbers’ person because working with data is very little about number crunching (the technology usually takes care of this for you) and a lot about analysing, experimenting, testing, and questioning. All you need is a curious mind and an understanding of the key principles and tools. Data concepts that you should be aware of include performance monitoring trends, big data, and data mining. Let’s look at each of these: 20.3.1 Performance monitoring and trends Data analytics are all about monitoring user behaviour and marketing campaign performance over time. The last part is crucial. There is little value in looking at a single point of data. You need to look at trends and changes over a set period to encourage a dynamic view of data.
For example, it is not that helpful to say that 10% of this month’s web traffic converted. Is that good or bad, high or low? But saying that 10% more users converted this month than last month shows a positive change or trend. While it can be tempting to focus on single ‘hero’ numbers and exciting-looking figures, such as ‘Look, we have 5000 Facebook fans!’, these really don’t give a full picture if they are not presented in context. In fact, we call these ‘vanity metrics’ because they look good, but they don’t really tell you much. Monitoring performance and trends will help you determine the next steps to improve your impact in the market, customer engagement, and increased sales by generating new leads. 20.3.2 Big data ‘Big data’ is the term used to describe truly vast data sets, the ones that are so big and unwieldy that they require specialised software and massive computers to process. Companies like Google, Facebook, and YouTube generate and collect so much data every day that they have entire warehouses full of hard drives to store it all. Understanding how it works and how to think about data on this scale provides some valuable lessons for all analysts. Here are three: 1. Measure trends, not absolute figures: The more data you have, the more meaningful it is to look at how things change over time. 2. Focus on patterns: With enough data, patterns over time should become apparent so consider looking at weekly, monthly, or even seasonal flows. 3. Investigate anomalies: If your expected pattern suddenly changes, try to find out why and use this information to inform your actions going forward. 20.3.3 Data mining Data mining is the process of finding patterns hidden in large numbers and databases. Rather than having a human analyst process the information, an automated computer programme pulls apart the data and matches it to known patterns to deliver insights. This can often reveal surprising and unexpected results, and tends to break assumptions.
20.4 TRACKING AND COLLECTING DATA Data tracking is the process of selecting specific metrics and events to track, then collecting, organising, and analysing the resulting data. Once you’ve analysed the data, you can apply your insights to improve business performance and customer experience (Baker, 2021). A key problem with tracking users on websites used to be that it was impossible to track individual users – only individual browsers, or devices – since this was done through cookies. If, for example, Levi visits the website from Chrome on his home computer and Safari on his work laptop, the website will think he’s two different users. If Nosipho visits the site from the home computer, also using Chrome, the website will think she’s the same user as Levi, because the cookie set when Levi visited the site will still be there. Email opens aren’t tracked with cookies. Instead, when the images in the email load, a tiny 1×1 pixel also loads and tracks open rate. This means that if the user is blocking images, their activity will not be tracked. To track if those who did open your email then visited your page, or eventually converted, links within the email also include UTM tags. UTM tags are codes in the URL that enable your analytics software to track where a user has come from.
With growing consumer privacy concerns, evidenced in laws like the EU Privacy Directive (1995) and the Protection of Personal Information Act (PoPIA, 2021) which requires websites to disclose their cookie usage, cookies started to fall out of favour, making tracking more difficult. Google’s Universal Analytics changed all of that when it was introduced in 2012. Now, about a decade later, Google will be replacing Universal Analytics with Google Analytics 4 by mid 2023. Because of its dominance in the search engine market, we will focus on how Google will affect tracking and measurement using these models. 20.4.1 Universal Analytics and Google Analytics 4 When it was introduced, Universal Analytics set the standard for how user data was collected and organised. It was designed to offer new tracking codes for websites and features to measure user behaviour more accurately. This however, will be phased out by 1 July 2023, and Google Analytics 4 will replace the measurement model. The difference between Universal Analytics and Google Analytics 4 According to Boon (2021), the key differences between Universal Analytics and Google Analytics 4 (GA4) are as follows: Different measuring models Universal Analytics uses a measurement model based on sessions and pageviews. A session is a group of user interactions (hits) with a website that takes place over a given timeframe. A session can contain multiple pageviews, events, and ecommerce transactions. GA4 uses a measurement model based on events and parameters. The principle here is that any interaction can be captured as an event. As a result, all Universal Analytics hit types translate to events in GA4. Removal of monthly hit limits Another significant difference between Universal Analytics and GA4 is the removal of monthly hit limits. The free version of Universal Analytics had a monthly limit of 10 million hits, which no longer exists. Instead, GA4 has a limit on the number of different events that can be captured (500). There is, at the time of writing, no limit as to the volume of hits that can be collected. This has resulted in a number of clients already opting for a GA4-first approach to their analytics. Free connection to BigQuery The final difference is GA4’s free connection to BigQuery. Previously this feature was only available to GA360 customers, one of the big differentiators between the free and paid versions of GA. BigQuery enables very large and complex data sets to be queried very quickly and takes the data out of GA that gives you the ability to interrogate it without the issue of sampling.
How does Google Analytics 4 work? Google Analytics 4 is a set of Google Analytics reports and data for your website and/or app. Google calls this a ‘property’. GA4 has the following capabilities: • Collects both website and app data to better understand the customer journey • Uses events instead of session-based data • Includes privacy controls, such as cookieless measurement and conversion modeling • Offers guidance without complex models through predictive capabilities • Integrates directly to media platforms to drive actions (Google Analytics 4, n.d.). How to set up Google Analytics 4 First, you need a primary Google account, used for services such as Gmail or YouTube. You can use this to set up your Analytics account. This should be configured using a Google account that will always be available for your business. Now you need to set up an Analytics account. You can do this from the Admin page of your Google account, in the Account column. Once you have clicked Create Account, give your account a name and configure the data-sharing settings. This controls which data you share with Google. Click next to add the first property to your account. Go to support.google.com/ analytics/answer/9304153 and follow the steps to: • Create a Google Analytics 4 account • Add a data stream • Set up data collection. Google Analytics is not the only analytics package available. Other packages exist for detailed tracking of social media accounts, emails, and website data. Website analysis should always account for any campaigns being run. Generating high traffic volumes by employing various digital marketing tactics, such as SEO, PPC, and email marketing, can be a pointless and costly exercise if visitors are leaving your site without achieving one or more of your website’s goals. Conversion optimisation aims to convert as many of a website’s visitors as possible into active customers.
Google Analytics 4 tags Tags allow you to quickly and easily update measurement codes and related code fragments – collectively known as tags – on your website or mobile app. Google Analytics 4 makes use of two tag types, instead of the one used by Universal Analytics. This is how Google explains it: “The GA4 Configuration tag initialises Google Analytics for your Google Analytics 4 property on a particular page. It handles behaviour such as setting of Google Analytics cookies, sending automatic and enhanced measurement events, and declaring common settings. The Configuration tag should be fired on every page where you want to collect data for a Google Analytics 4 property, and should be triggered to fire as soon as possible, before any other Google Analytics 4 event tags. You can configure Fields to Set in the GA4 Configuration tag to set parameters that need to remain consistent across all events on a page. GA4 Event tags inherit the parameters of the GA4 Configuration tag. Parameters set by the GA4 Configuration tag remain static for all events occurring on a page. The parameters are refreshed only when the Configuration tag fires again, typically the next time the page is loaded. The Google Analytics 4 Event tag lets you send custom events to Analytics, in addition to the events that are sent automatically or through enhanced measurement. If you schedule the configuration tag with an Initialization trigger, event tags can fire with any other triggers and the sequencing will be automatically guaranteed.” 20.4.2. Gathering data Google Analytics can measure almost anything about the customers who visit your website. To gather the kind of data that can help you optimise your site, you’ll need to know where to look. Navigation panel When you log into your analytics account, you will see a navigation panel on the left
Reports The first button on the navigation panel is Reports. By default, you will see the Reports snapshot report, the Realtime report and report collections and topics.
Reports snapshot This overview report is displayed when clicking Reports in the navigation. Any overview report can be set as the Reports snapshot
Realtime report This report lets you monitor activity on your website or app as it happens. It allows you to see how users enter the conversion funnel and what happens once they are in the funnel. You can use Realtime to monitor changes to your traffic. It can help you answer these questions: 1. Is the one-day promotion driving traffic? 2. Have there been immediate effects as a result of a social network post? 3. Is my new content affecting traffic? 4. Is my tracking code working properly?
Life cycle collections A collection is a set of reports. Life cycle and User appear in the navigation by default. Under the Life cycle collection, you will find the following reports that help you understand user activity from acquisition to conversion: Acquisition: This refers to information about new and returning users and the method of acquisition. It shows you which sources drive the most traffic to your site. By default, it contains: • Acquisition overview which summarises your data to help you understand where your traffic comes from. • User acquisition which provides data on where new users come from. In this report, the prefix ‘First user’ means the data is about new users. • Traffic acquisition shows you where new sessions come from. In this report, the suffix ‘Session’ tells you that the data is about new sessions. • Google Ads campaigns gives you information about which campaigns drove traffic to your app or website. Your Google Ads account must be linked for this to work. To populate these reports with the necessary data, integrate with an ads platform, and use the available auto-tagging.
Engagement: This refers to user activity by event count, the time users engage with your site or app, as well as the number of times users return to your site or app. It contains the: • Engagement overview which summarises data across all the reports in this topic. • User stickiness ratios which compare engagement by active users over a shorter time frame with their engagement over a longer time frame. • User engagement metric which shows the time that your screen was in focus. • Events reports which includes the name of each event linked to Google Analytics. This includes the initial automatically collected events, the enhanced measurement events enabled, any chosen recommended events, and your own custom events. • Conversion reports which display the events marked as conversions
Monetisation: This refers to the revenue you generate through the website or app. It includes reports about: • eCommerce purchases which allow you to measure the revenue from the items for sale and interactions with those items. • In-app purchases which let you measure revenue grouped by product ID. Product ID is a unique code for each product that can be purchased. • Publisher ads which enable you to measure how much revenue you are generating through ads on your app, grouped by ad unit. An ad unit is a unique code for each ad on your ads account.
Retention: How effectively you are able to turn new users into returning users and the number of users who keep returning. It contains these reports and charts: • New users which refer to new users who have been identified as users who don’t have both a Google Analytics cookie, Client ID, or App Instance ID. • Returning users which refer to any user that already has a Google Analytics cookie, Client ID or App Instance ID. • Cohorts which refer to groups of users that share a common characteristic set out by an Analytics dimension. • User retention by cohort chart shows the percentage of new users who return on the second and eighth day. • User engagement by cohort chart shows the average engagement time of returning users. • User retention chart shows the percentage of users returning every day for their first 42 days. It starts at 100% and decreases as users drop off. • User engagement chart shows the average engagement time of users returning in the first 42 days. • Lifetime value chart illustrating the average revenue from new users over their first 120 days
User collections Under the User collection, you will find the following reports that help you understand the people who use your site or app: • Demographics: This topic allows you to classify your users by age, location, language, gender, and the interests they express through their online activity. Google Analytics may apply a data threshold that will cause reports or exploration to have missing data. These thresholds are system defined and exist to prevent anyone from inferring the identify of individual users, based on the data in the demographic topic. For mobile apps, data is found from the Android Advertising ID and the iOS Identifier for Advertisers. If these are not present, Analytics cannot source the data. That means the data available may represent only a subset of your users and not the whole composition. • Tech: This topic gives insight into the technologies people use. It provides information on device categories, namely, mobile, desktop and tablet devices. It also gives information on the type of platform used to access your app or website, like web browsers, Android apps and iOS apps
Explorations The second button on the navigation panel is Explorations. This is a set of advanced techniques that go further than standard reports to help you find out more about your customers’ behaviour. Under Explorations, you can access data and analytical techniques that you can’t find in reports. An exploration consists of three sections. The large area on the right that shows your data using the selected technique, is called the canvas. It can have multiple tabs, which allows you to use multiple techniques in a single exploration. The default technique for a blank exploration is the free-form table. Let’s look at the techniques on offer: • Free-form exploration sets out your data in a crosstab layout. You can use different visualisations, such as bar charts, pie charts, line charts, scatter plots, and geo maps. • Cohort exploration gathers data about the behaviour of users that share common attributes. • Funnel exploration visualises the user’s steps necessary to complete a task on your site or app so that you can see how to optimise user experience. • Segment overlap exploration shows how different user segments relate to each other. It can be used to identify new segments with complex criteria. • User exploration looks at the users that make up segments. Using this, you can find extra information on individual user behaviour and activities. • User lifetime exploration compiles user behaviour over their lifetime as a customer.
On the left is the Variables panel and the Tab settings panel. In the Variables panel, you can access the dimensions, metrics, and segments you can use. You can also adjust the timeframe here. The Tab settings panel lets you configure the currently selected tab. First, select the technique, then add items from the Variables panel, and finally configure the Tab settings.
Differences between Reports and Explorations Reports and Explorations may seem similar, since they both provide insights that can lead to action. Usually, the data will be the same in both Reports and Explorations, but sometimes they are different. Typically when they differ, Explorations tend to be more accurate. That happens for the following reasons: 1. Support different fields: These two parts of GA4 give you different views, at different levels of granularity. The same dimensions and metrics may not be supported in both. 2. Segments and comparisons differences: Comparisons from Reports are converted to segments in Explorations and any of those that are not supported, will be dropped. 3. Date differences: If you create a report with a date range outside your settings, all other data outside of that will be eliminated. 4. Amount of data: If a property is collecting a lot of data, Analytics can use different methodologies between the two which can cause inconsistencies. 5. Processing time differences: Since data comes from multiple different systems, you may notice differences over 48 hours. Advertising The third button on the navigation panel is Advertising. These reports look slightly different to the others. Currently, there are three types of reports you can access: 1. Advertising snapshot which summarises the business metrics. 2. Model comparison which compares how different attribution models impact the value of marketing channels. 3. Conversion paths which show the paths customers take to conversion, as well as how different attribution models can credit those paths.
These reports can help you answer important questions, such as specifying which ads had a role in conversion. In addition, it can help you identify the paths customers take to conversion, showing you how much time passed between a customer’s first interest and conversion.
Configuration The last button on the navigation panel is Configuration. From this panel, you can access: • Events to create or modify website and app events: All data in GA4 reports come from events triggered by users when they interact with your site or app. • Conversions events to measure the most important events: Set up the most important events for your business as conversion events. • Audiences to create, edit, and archive audiences: This allows you to segment your users based on parameters that are important to your business. 20.4.3. The type of information captured By now, you know the difference between objectives, goals, KPIs, and targets. You will be focussing on KPIs when you measure data that has been captured. KPIs are the metrics that help you understand how well you are meeting your objectives. A metric is a defined unit of measurement. Definitions can vary between various analytics vendors, depending on their approach to gathering data. Analytics metrics are divided into: • Counts: These are the raw figures that will be used for analysis. • Ratios: These are interpretations of the data that is counted. Metrics can be applied to three different groupings: 1. Aggregate: All traffic to the website for a defined period. 2. Segmented: A subset of all traffic according to a specific filter, such as by campaign (PPC) or visitor type (new user vs. returning user). 3. Individual: The activity of a single visitor for a defined period.
Basic metrics To establish whether your campaigns are working, you need to look at some basic metrics, such as: • Overall web traffic: The number of users that visit a website. • Sessions and average session duration: The visitor count in 30-minute increments and how much time each visitor spends on your website. • New vs. returning users: Users visiting your website for the first time show natural traffic is taking place, and users coming back to your website show the content is useful to them. • Page views and most visited pages: The number of times a page was successfully requested, and which pages were visited the most. • Exit rates and bounce rates: The last page of a visit and the single page view visits, divided by the entry pages. • Conversion rates: Metrics that provide insight into whether you are achieving your analytics goals (and through those, your overall website objectives). • Impressions: The number of people who viewed your advertisement or content. Each view counts as a new impression. • Social reach: The number of people who viewed your advertisement or content. Reach is only counted once. • Social engagement: The number of people that interacted with the content through clicks, likes, shares, comments, etc. • Click-through rates: The number of times a link was clicked, divided by the number of times it was seen (impressions). For mobile data, you can add these metrics: • Device category: Whether the visit came from a desktop, mobile, or tablet. • Mobile device info: The specific brand and make of the mobile device. • Mobile input selector: The main input method for the device (such as touchscreen, click wheel, or stylus) • Operating system: The OS that the device runs (some popular ones include iOS and Android). 20.5 ANALYSING DATA To test the success of your website, you need to remember the TAO of conversion optimisation: Track – Analyse – Optimise A number is just a number until you can interpret it. Typically, you will not be looking at the raw figures, but what they tell you about how your users are interacting with your website. Because your web analytics package will never be able to provide you with 100% accurate results, you need to analyse trends and changes over time to truly understand your brand’s performance.
Kaushik (2007) recommends a three-pronged approach to analytics: • Analysing behaviour data infers the intent of a user. Why are users visiting? • Analysing outcome metrics shows how many users performed the goal actions. Are visitors completing the goals we want them to? • A wide range of data tells us about the user experience. What are the patterns of user behaviour? How can we influence them so that we achieve our objectives? 20.5.1 Behaviour Behaviour can indicate a lot about a user’s intent. By studying data you can infer which problems visitors are expecting your website or app to solve: Some methods to gauge the intent of your visitors include: • Click density analysis: Looking at a heatmap to see where users are clicking on the site and if there are any noteworthy ‘clumps’ of clicks. For instance, many users clicking on a page element that is not actually a button or link. • Segmentation: Selecting a smaller group of visitors to analyse, based on a shared characteristic. This lets you see if particular types of visitors behave differently. • Behaviour and content metrics: Analysing data around user behaviours (e.g., time spent on site or the number of pages viewed), can give a lot of insight into how engaging and valuable your website is. Looking at content metrics will show you which pages are the most popular as well as which ones users leave most often, providing excellent insight for your content marketing strategy, as well as indicating what your audience is really interested in.
