SOCIAL MEDIA ADVERTISING
17.1 INTRODUCTION Social media first became a choice for marketers in 2005, when Facebook launched its first advertising option. The medium has advanced in giant strides since then, offering a reasonably low-cost ad option to marketers and reaching a wide audience as long as the ads are engaging enough. Social media ads can be recognised by labels such as ‘suggested post’ or ‘promoted pin’, depending on the platform. The ad formats available are continuously evolving, which means that marketers need to keep up with what’s available to them; there are ever-increasing opportunities to reach their consumers on a platform and in a format that suits them.
17.3 UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA ADVERTISING Social media advertising should be considered as part of an overall social media effort. While brands can start a Facebook page and share engaging posts, those posts would be seen only by a fraction of the possible audience, even if they have already liked your page. It is necessary to pay to promote your posts to ensure that you reach a much larger percentage of your target audience. Social media advertising is a form of online advertising that takes place on social media networks. Many platforms offer extraordinarily detailed targeting options that match users whom advertisers have identified as belonging to specific purchasing groups, making it a great way to reach exactly the right group of users with your ads. While more traditional forms of advertising are arguably somewhat inefficient, the targeting offered by social media platforms make it stand out even from other forms of online advertising, such as search or display ads. Social media platforms also tend to have higher clickthrough and engagement rates at a lower cost (Hootsuite, 2015). While it is possible to use social media advertising without considering any other aspect of your digital marketing strategy, it should be considered holistically. Chapter 14: Social media strategy discusses how social media in general can fit into other channels. Social media advertising can be used to: • Draw attention to products and drive sales • Drive traffic to websites and other online properties • Encourage foot traffic • Encourage other activities offline. Social media, used well, should be an essential part of any paid media campaign, when one considers the targeting options and access to consumers it offers. 17.4 CORE PRINCIPLES Social media consists of a vast number of different platforms, most of which have different rules for what will and will not work well as an advertisement. There are, however, some general principles that govern social media advertising as a whole. 17.4.1 General guidelines First, remember that 85% of social media time takes place on mobile devices (Backlinko, 2021). This means that any ad you create for social media is highly likely to be viewed on mobile, so you need to make sure that it will display well on that device. Test your posts on mobile devices before you pay to promote them. Consider: • Images should be clear and convey meaning even when small • Text should be brief enough to minimise the need for scrolling
• The point of the ad should come across immediately with a clear CTA • Any links in the ad should lead to mobile-optimised landing pages. Second, most content on social media is user-generated, so if you’re creating paid ads, you need to match the rules of the platform you’re on and generate content that fits what users of that platform will expect. Make sure you understand the platform before you start advertising on it
Third, use your regular, unpaid posts to test out your paid ads. Make sure that you use effective social media copy in every post. Keep your copy short and to the point, with a clear call to action that tells the reader exactly what to do next, and give them a reason to click or carry out the CTA. Then, track which posts are being liked, shared, or commented on − those should be your first choice for paid promotion. The feedback you get on posts is often near-instantaneous, which allows you to respond quickly to whichever posts are doing well and which are doing badly. Facebook Ads Manager can help you do A/B testing by putting equal funds behind two different posts. The one that gets a better initial response gets the rest of the funds. Fourth, rotate ads often. Social media users expect fresh content; they should not be seeing the same ad multiple times over multiple days, so rotate ads every three to five days (Hootsuite, 2016). The general rule is that a user should see an ad a maximum of four times
17.4.2 Payment models The various payment models are explained in greater depth in Chapter 19: Online and display advertising. The most likely payment models you will encounter on social media include: • CPC (cost per click, pay only when the ad is clicked on) • CPE (cost per engagement, pay only for demonstrated engagement with the ad) • CPM (cost per thousand impressions) • oCPM (optimised cost per mille, Facebook’s flexible ad bid type, where bids can be adjusted based on the goals the advertiser hopes to achieve). Other payment models will be encountered on other platforms. For example, depending on the goal of the ad campaign, Pinterest uses a CPM or optimised CPC payment model. A lot of specialised paid media on Twitter is done via third parties like Ad Dynamo and can require high budgets and one-off costs rather than being cost per view or engagement.
17.4.3 Platforms One of the core principles to keep in mind when choosing a social media platform on which to advertise is that you need to go where your audience is. You will find different audiences and communities on different platforms. Even if one person is on multiple social media platforms, they perform vastly different activities on each of them. Be sure to choose a platform that fits your needs as a business as well. Let’s take a look at a few of the most popular platforms to see what they can offer and why you might want to focus your attention on them. As you read, keep in mind that for most networks, the number of older users is increasing which can lead to changes in the behaviour of younger users on the platform or even drive them off entirely.
Facebook What they offer: Facebook offers a wide array of targeting options and the biggest social media audience in the world, with roughly 2.89 billion users as of the second quarter of 2021 (Statista, 2021). Ad formats are based on desired objectives, which we will discuss in the next section. Their pricing can vary significantly based on a number of factors, but their ad platform is fairly intuitive, and Facebook Analytics gives you a lot of information you can use to optimise ad performance. You will have access to Facebook Ads Manager, which allows you to manage campaigns, ad sets, and individual ads. This is also available as an app.
Who uses it: Worldwide, of the 2,98 billion Facebook users, 44% of female-identified and 56% of male-identified users are active on Facebook. The demographics are skewed toward the youth market, with 23% of active users aged 18 to 24 and 31% aged 25 to 34. 62% of users have some form of higher education (Statista, 2021). Best suited to: Hootsuite statistics indicate that two thirds of Facebook users visit the Facebook page of a local business. Every business should have a Facebook page, as it is the bare minimum of what users expect. Your business should be on Facebook even if it is just listed with an address, website, and other basic details. Whether a business should use paid advertising to promote posts depends on what it wants to achieve, but if you plan to use social media advertising at all, you should consider starting on Facebook. To find out more about Facebook marketing, visit the Hootsuite website: blog.hootsuite.com/facebook-marketing-tips. Instagram What they offer: Instagram offers photo, video, and carousel ads in a number of formats. Instagram also offers an omnichannel, integrated shopping experience. The newest feature, Instagram Shoppables, enables purchases to be made directly on the platform. Because it is owned by Facebook, it has many of the same features, including analytics (through Facebook Ads Manager), good targeting options, and various objectives to drive campaigns. Instagram stories is also a powerful feature, which is mentioned in Chapter 13: Social media. Instagram is potentially the best platform at the moment to work with influencers. It has a very tight community culture with a focus on quality, unique content, and creativity.
Who uses it: Globally, 51% of female-identified and 49% of male-identified Instagram users are active on the platform. Of its 1.386 billion users, 180 million reside in India and 110 in the United States. Closely following are users from Brazil and Indonesia, respectively. The important thing to note for Instagram is age. As of July 2021, 62% of active Instagram users were between 18 and 34, compared to only 6% above 55 (Statista, 2021). Best suited to: In theory, any business can use Instagram. The key attraction for Instagram is visually attractive pictures and videos. Businesses that lend themselves to visuals like this, such as food, decoration, or travel-related brands, will have an advantage, but any business that wants to capture that all-important 18−34- year-old demographic should be active here. Twitter What they offer: Twitter offers ad campaigns based on objectives, much like Facebook and Instagram, and the kind of targeting you would expect from a major social media platform. Many marketers point out that advertising on Twitter is a problem because the ads are expensive, the targeting is not as good as Facebook’s, and user growth has stalled. However, pay-per-click (PPC) on Twitter can be cheaper than other options. Followers earned from a Twitter campaign tend to be fairly qualified prospects. They will have been chosen to see your tweets based on how well they fit your targeting profile, and they then choose to follow you based on how well your tweet speaks to their needs.
Who uses it: Twitter’s users are also skewed towards the youth market: 55% of adults aged 18 to 34, but only 17% of adults over 50, use this platform. At 68%, it also has a significantly higher adoption rate from male-identified users. At 73%, the highest proportion of Twitter users originate from the United States. 55% of Twitter users are from Japan, where Twitter ranks as the top social media platform. Closely following are users from India, United Kingdom, and Brazil respectively (Statista, 2021). Best suited to: Twitter is suited to any business that wants to reach an audience like the one described. Twitter audiences are used to instant gratification, Twitter feuds (check out the hashtag #cuteanimaltweetoff for a good example of this), and snappy comebacks. Twitter is a highly politicised space, so any slip-ups or faux pas on the part of your brand will be quickly picked up. LinkedIn What they offer: Most social media sites offer good targeting options, but in keeping with its position as a social network for business professionals, LinkedIn’s targeting options involve someone’s professional abilities. It also tends to convert well on gated content that requires users to enter an email address or other information to download something. Who uses it: Global user reports indicate that 57 % male-identified and 43% female-identified LinkedIn users are active on the platform. The highest engagement from a user-group is those aged 25 to 34. With those below and above this bracket having similar adoption rates, as indicated in the breakdown below (Statista, 2021): • 19.6% of adults 18−24 • 59.9% of adults 25−34 • 17.5% of adults 35−54 • 2.9% of adults over 55.
LinkedIn gained more users over the global Covid 19 pandemic. At the start of 2020, it had 700 million users. In the first quarter of 2021, it increased to 722 million and it spread to over 200 countries. LinkedIn reports indicate that of the 722 million, 690 million are professionals and 3 million are MBA degree holders. It also has a high proportion of decision makers, so it is a viable option for B2B marketing. On the LinkedIn press page, you can see a map of all their users (LinkedIn, 2021)
Best suited to: B2B marketers who want to target business professionals, as well as companies that hire a lot of people, should start with LinkedIn. Pinterest What they offer: Pinterest doesn’t offer as many targeting options as some other social media platforms, but it still has basic location, device, gender, and language targeting. Users often visit Pinterest specifically to gather information about and plan potential purchases, and those who view ads on Pinterest tend to have greater awareness and purchase intent than those who don’t. Who uses it: Pinterest is a great platform for targeting women. Of users on Pinterest, 71% identify as women and 15% identify as men, with the remainder unspecified. At 89.9 million users, the United States has a significantly high adoption rate. Brazil has 27.5 million users, followed by Mexico (14.5 million), and Germany (14.1 million). It is again skewed toward the younger market, with 57% of adults between 18−34 using it, dropping steadily as age increases. Only 4% of adults aged 65+ use the platform (Statista, 2021)
Best suited to: Retailers tend to make the most use of this platform, though other businesses can create successful accounts as well. The key is to create beautiful, useful boards that people want to look at, and to use advertising to capitalise on that.
Snapchat What they offer: Snapchat has come a long way since its origin as a niche platform mostly used by teenagers. It still has a lot of pull with young demographics, and it encourages real-time content creation and consumption, with users paying more attention to content. Facebook, Instagram, and WhatsApp have been fairly blatant about stealing Snapchat’s features, including Stories and Filters, which could mean a drop-off in users over time. However, Snapchat is fighting back with new offerings, such as Lenses and Virtual Reality Try-ons. Who uses it: As of July 2021, Snapchat has 293 million active daily users and up to 513.9 active monthly users. Globally, 56% of its users identify as female and 43% as male. It has the highest adoption rate in the United States (105.3 million) and India (99.8 million). France (23.3 million) and the United Kingdom (19.8) follow respectively. When looking at the age of users, the numbers are closely spread. At 22%, the highest active use is from those aged 25 to 34. Closely following this are users aged 13 to 17, who account for 21%, and users aged 18 to 20, who account for 20% of the user profile (Statista, 2021).
Best suited to: Snapchat has fewer options for small businesses than most other social media platforms simply because their options are expensive. Prices have come down, however, with cheapest option, the Sponsored Local Geofilters ad, coming in at as little as US $5. This means that, while the bigger options are still only available to large businesses, other options are available to almost anyone. This means that Snapchat is suited to any business that wants to find a particularly young audience. YELP What they offer: Yelp is a review site that helps users select a business that suits their needs. There are many sites similar to Yelp, so keep in mind that you may want to choose a different option that is more active in your area. Tracking leads generated by Yelp can be difficult, but it does provide some metrics, like page views and ad clicks. With users relying more and more on reviews and review sites when choosing where to buy, platforms like Yelp are increasingly attractive. Who uses it: Yelp’s demographic profile shows that it has an even spread from male and female users. 53% of Yelpers are women, showing only a slight preference of over men (47%). Yelp has an equal adoption rate in rural and urban areas, and its most popular users are aged 25 to 34. Most remarkably, 43% of the demographic come from high-income households. In general, a Yelp user is more likely to try an innovative product and, whilst 54% are more open to direct advertising in exchange for free content, 46% of Yelpers expressed annoyance from receiving direct ads (Statista, 2021).
Best suited to: Yelp works best for location-based businesses. That said, many advertisers argue that advertising on Yelp may not be worth the money compared to a free profile, so weigh your options carefully
17.5 IMPLEMENTING SOCIAL MEDIA ADVERTISING Each platform has its own objectives, ad types, and targeting options. In this section, we will examine a few of the most popular ones 17.5.1 Facebook We have already looked at what kind of audience can be found on Facebook and the broad strokes of what they offer. Objectives Facebook offers several paid-for advertising solutions based on the action the advertiser wants the audience to take and the purpose of the ads. The core objectives are awareness, consideration, or conversions, which Facebook has broken down further into more specific objectives on which you can base your ad creation: • Awareness: • Brand awareness • Local awareness (promoting to users nearby) • Reach (show your ad to the maximum possible number of users). • Consideration: • Traffic generation for your website or app • App installs • Engagement (encourage comments, page likes, shares, event responses, and offer claims) • Video views • Lead generation (collect lead information from interested parties). • Conversion: • Increased store traffic for your website or app • Product catalogue sales (create ads that automatically show products from your catalogue based on your target audience) • Store visits (promote multiple business locations to users nearby) • Ad format (that matches advertising objective). Ad types Once you have chosen an objective, Facebook offers a set number of ad formats to choose from that will help you meet that objective. Those formats are: • Photo • Video • Stories • Messenger • Carousel • Slideshow • Collection (with an Instant Experience feature) • Playables
These ads have several options for placement in your users’ feed. They can appear RHS (right hand side) desktop, in the news feed on desktop, or in the news feed on mobile. Because Facebook owns Instagram, you also have the option of showing certain ad types there. The vast majority of Facebook’s revenue comes from mobile, so they are very focused on a good mobile experience for their users Targeting options Once you have chosen an objective and ad type, you will need to look at Facebook’s targeting options, which gather user data from Instagram and WhatsApp as well. They offer three audience options to choose from: 1. Core audiences: You select your audience manually based on demographics like age and location. 2. Custom audiences: You upload a contact list to connect with customers on Facebook. 3. Lookalike audiences: You use customer information to find people similar to them on Facebook
Core audiences This is a manual selection which allows many detailed targeting options: • Location: Where the users are located, city, region, etc. Allows exclusion of locations. • Demographics: Age, gender, languages, relationship status, type of work, education, and more. • Interests: Interests, hobbies, and Pages they like on Facebook. • Behaviours: Activities users do on or off Facebook that give information on which device they use, their purchase behaviours or intent, and travel preferences. • Connections: Offers the option to include or exclude users who meet at least one parameter (not all of them). This can include whether people have a connection to you on Facebook (or have friends who do)
If you select multiple options from within an ad targeting category, you’ll reach users who meet any of the options you’ve selected. For example, if you choose multiple Locations like the United States and Canada, you’ll target anyone who lives in either the United States OR Canada, not both. Another example might be choosing multiple options from the Interests targeting category. If you choose interests like Golf and Tennis, you’ll target anyone who likes golf OR tennis, not just users who like both golf and tennis
Keep in mind that it’s not possible to target ad sets only to the users who fall into all of the selected categories.
Custom audiences This kind of selection has several benefits, including: • Powerful exact targeting • No wastage • Cap bidding and frequency • Encrypted and secure data. Using these selectors, you can create a list of who you want to reach using their email addresses. Facebook matches the email addresses and allows exact targeting of those users through their ads. Custom audiences are extremely powerful; if you have users’ email addresses, you can target individuals. This is useful for any brand that make use of newsletters or gathers email addresses elsewhere. Lookalike Audiences Lookalike audiences is useful because it helps you find a similar audience to your existing fans and gives more accurate targeting. This makes it easy to find more users on Facebook who are like the people you know. You can build a Lookalike Audience based on: • People who like your Page • Custom audiences that you’ve created with emails, phone numbers, or website or app data. It’s an effective way to reach even more potential customers, because you can target your Lookalike Audience with the adverts you create. Think of Facebook as a ‘sophisticated audience matchmaker. You tell Facebook what you like in a customer, and Facebook delivers a new audience segment filled with prospects that meet your criteria’ (Sehl, 2019).