SEARCH ENGINE OPTIMISATION (SEO)
5.1 INTRODUCTION With millions of people performing billions of searches each day to find content on the internet, Google alone processes over 40 000 searches per second (Internet Live Stats, 2017). It makes sense that marketers want their products to be findable online. Search engines, the channels through which these searches happen, use closely guarded algorithms to determine the results displayed. Determining what factors these algorithms take into account has led to a growing practice known as search engine optimisation (SEO). SEO is the practice of optimising a website to achieve the highest possible ranking on the search engine results pages (SERPs). Someone who practices SEO professionally is known as an SEO (search engine optimiser). Google uses about 200 different factors in its algorithm to determine relevance and ranking (Dean, 2016). None of the major search engines disclose the elements they use to rank pages, but there are many SEO practitioners who spend time analysing patent applications to try to determine what these are.
SEO can be split into two distinct camps: white hat SEO and black hat SEO. 1. White hat SEO: This refers to working within the parameters set by search engines to optimise a website for better user experience. Search engines want to send users to the website that is best suited to their needs; white hat SEO should ensure that users can find what they are looking for. 2. Black hat SEO: This refers to attempts to game the search engines. These SEOs use dubious means to achieve high rankings and their websites are occasionally blacklisted by search engines. Black hat SEO techniques may have short-lived gains in some cases. However, the risk of penalties from the major search engines, especially Google, make such SEO techniques not worth it in the end
5.3 CORE PRINCIPLES In order to understand how to use SEO to your advantage, it’s important to understand what it is and how it works. Remember that data is one of the most powerful tools at your disposal. SEO is just one way to utilise the data that you collect
5.3.1. Understanding SEO Search engines need to help users find what they’re looking for. To do this, they list the best or most relevant results first. Search engines typically rank results based on signals such as popularity, authority, relevance, trust, and importance. SEO, also called organic or natural optimisation, involves optimising websites to achieve high rankings on search engines for certain selected keywords without the use of Google Ads. Generally, techniques used for optimising on one search engine will help efforts across others. SEO can be divided into two main strategies: 1. On-page optimisation: This is achieved by implementing changes to the HTML code, content, and structure of a website, making it more accessible to search engines, and by extension, easier for users to find. 2. Off-page optimisation: This is generally focused on building links to the website and covers activities like social media and digital PR. SEO is an extremely effective way of generating new business to a site. It is a continuous process and a way of thinking about how search engines see your website and how users use search engines to find your website. It’s search psychology. Consider that SEO stands for ‘Search Experience Optimisation’ because search engines want to promote the visibility of websites that they determine provide the best experience for users. The best experience refers to how user-friendly the website is and how well the website’s content meets users’ needs, as well as enhancing other factors to convince search engines. SEO is a fairly technical practice but it can easily be broken down into five main areas: 1. A search engine-friendly website structure 2. A well-researched list of keywords 3. Content optimised to target those keywords 4. Link popularity 5. User insights. 5.3.2 Search engine-friendly website structure Search engines encounter two kinds of obstacles: 1. Technical challenges that prevent the search engine spider from accessing content 2. A competitive marketing environment where everyone wants to rank highly.
Technical challenges To ensure that search engines can access your content, you must remove technical barriers. There are certain best practices that you can use to achieve optimum results. The key is to make sure that there are direct HTML links to each page you want the search engines to index. The most important pages should be accessible directly from the homepage of your website. The information architecture or, how content is planned and laid out, has important usability and SEO implications. Users want to find what they are looking for quickly and easily, while website owners want search engine spiders to be able to access and index all applicable pages. Google consistently points out that it wants users to have a good user experience. Content relevance, user engagement, and user experience are all crucial to SEO (Martin, 2016). There are times when user experience and SEO can be at odds with each other but, usually, usable, accessible websites are search engine-friendly as well. Another technical challenge to search engines is Flash. For the most part, search engines struggle to crawl and index Flash sites. There are some workarounds, but the best approach from an SEO perspective is to avoid building sites or delivering key content using Flash. Instead, use HTML5, which provides similar interactivity and visuals, while remaining easily crawlable. 5.3.3 Voice search As digital marketers, we must evolve with the times to stay effective. The ‘no interface trend’ refers to the way people want new, natural forms of interaction with technology. Consider Stephen Sandmann’s (2016) observation that, “Speech, gesture, touch and sight: truly intuitive technologies are set to transform your customer interactions forever”. When people think of SEO, they usually think of only the traditional type of SEO, based on desktop and mobile Google search. SEO has evolved to be mobile-centric, which now includes voice search. Many consumers use Google search on their mobile phones to find answers to their everyday questions. This means that you can encourage your consumers to engage with your brand via voice search-accessed mobile search. The Google app allows a person’s voice to access mobile Google search results on their smartphones. Google voice search is part of Google Assistant in all of the latest Android smartphones and Google Home devices. Other voice search tools include Amazon’s Alexa, Apple’s Siri, Microsoft’s Cortana, and Facebook’s Hey Facebook
Voice searches are usually made through mobile devices because of their on-the-go convenience factor, which means that the mobile context will generally apply. This has the following implications: • User behaviour relating to voice search differs from traditional mobile search. This may seem obvious, but you have to make a conscious effort to accommodate voice search in your mobile SEO strategy. • In most cases, voice searches appear in the form of questions, such as, “What movies are showing at Brooklyn Mall?” • Voice-derived search queries are usually longer than the average traditional search query. • Companies can develop ‘voice actions’ into their applications to take advantage of voice. These differences should be factored into your content by adding local keywords that are geographically relevant and by writing content that answers common questions that your intended audience may ask. Make sure your website’s content is the best at answering popular questions; it may appear as ‘Featured Snippets’ above the usual search results, which the relevant search engine will read out. The future Google Assistant is incredibly intuitive; it is a Google voice search that has contextual awareness. When you search using Google Assistant, it scans your phone’s screen and recent activities to help give it context for your search, thereby better answering your query to fill in the gaps of a vague search request. Google also makes use of a personal index of what you do on your Android phone as a means of learning more about you. Siri and other voice search platforms are making major headway in terms of technological advancements and additional predictive features. Voice search is here to stay and will become more widely used going forward. 5.4 IMPLEMENTATION How do you start building your keyword list? It requires a little thought and a fair amount of research and insight, using tools that are readily available to help you grow and refine your list of keywords. 5.4.1 SEO and keywords Keywords are the very foundation of search. When users enter a query on a search engine, they use the words they think are relevant to the search. The search engine then returns those pages it has calculated to be most relevant to the words searchers use and, increasingly, the implied meaning of the search. When you optimise your content around words and phrases that people search for, your website can rank higher for those terms.
Developers of search engines have built a sophisticated understanding of semantics and the way in which we use language. So, if a user looks for ‘car rental’, the search engine will look for pages that are relevant to ‘car rental’, as well as synonyms like ‘car hire’, ‘vehicle hire’, and so forth. Search engines have also built up knowledge around common misspellings, typos, synonyms, and related searches.
It is crucial that you implement keywords that are likely to be used by target audiences. Websites need to appear when potential customers are searching for them. A large part of keyword research is understanding search psychology. When we build our keyword lists, we are tapping into the mental process of searchers and putting together the right mix of keywords to target. There are four things to consider when choosing a keyword: 1. Search volume: How many searchers are using that phrase to find what they want? For example, there is an estimated monthly search volume of over 338 million for the keyword ‘hotel’, but an estimated 6 600 searches per month for ‘Cape Town Waterfront hotel’
2. Competition: How many other websites out there are targeting that same phrase? For example, Google finds over 2 900 000 000 results for ‘hotel’, but only 640 000 for ‘Cape Town Waterfront Hotel’. 3. Propensity to convert: What is the likelihood that the searcher using that keyword is going to convert on your site? A conversion is a desired action taken by the visitor to your website. Related to propensity to convert is the relevance of the selected term to what you are offering. If you are selling rooms at a hotel at the V&A Waterfront, which of the two terms – ‘hotel’ or ‘Cape Town Waterfront hotel’ – do you think will lead to a higher rate of conversions? 4. Value per lead: What is the average value per prospect attracted by the keyword? Depending on the nature of your website, the average value per lead varies. Look at the differences in results based on keywords used. Both show terms used by someone wanting to book a hotel in Cape Town, but it is expected that someone looking for a luxury hotel is intending to spend more. That means that this particular lead has a higher value, particularly if you have a hotel booking website that offers a range of accommodation.
Step-by-step keyword research Keyword research helps you to produce a repeatable content process that consistently earns traffic over time. Step 1: Brainstorm • Your primary focus should be on users’ needs from all potential aspects and contexts, not jamming or stuffing your website content full of certain keywords. • Offer users clarity in the form of descriptive content that features relevant vocabulary and terminology. Depending on how popular jargon is with the intended audience, avoid jargon in some cases. • Be mindful of US English and UK English spelling. This can make a difference in terms of a word’s popularity in search engines.
• What would users unfamiliar with your company name search for when looking for your company’s product or services? Leave it to Google Ads to target competitors’ specific keywords, like their names. • Think about the words you would use to describe your business and about the questions or needs of your customers that it fulfils. How would someone ask for what you are offering? Consider synonyms and misspellings, as well. • Bear in mind that people may not ask for your services using the same words that you use to describe them. You may sell ‘herbal infusions’, whereas people may ask for ‘herbal teas’ and some might even request a ‘tisane’. • Even common words are often misspelt and you may need to consider common misspellings and typos, for example, ‘morgage’.
Step 2: Gather data Two ways in which to gather accurate keyword data are to survey customers and to look at your website referral logs. Look at what terms customers are using to find you and add those to your list. If they are already sending you some traffic, it is worth trying to increase that traffic. Step 3: Use keyword research tools There are several tools available for keyword discovery and some of them are free. Some tools will scan your website and suggest keywords based on your current content. Most will let you enter keywords and will then return suggestions based on past research data, along with: • Similar keywords • Common keywords used with that keyword • Common misspellings • Frequency of the keywords in search queries • Industry-related keywords • Keywords that are sending traffic to your competitors • How many sites are targeting your keywords. See 5.8 Tools of the trade for some resources that you can use. Bearing in mind the factors that make a good keyword, you need to aim for the right mix of keywords. Low-volume terms with low levels of competition may be a good way to get traffic in the short term, but don’t be scared off by bigger competition in the high-value, high-volume areas. It may take longer to get there, but once you do, the revenue can make it worthwhile. It is a good idea to create a spreadsheet of the list of keywords, along with additional information about each one.
Optimising content for keywords Once keywords and phrases are selected, we need to ensure that the site contains content to target them. You must confirm that the content is properly structured and that it sends relevant signals. Content is the most important part of your website. Create relevant, targeted content aimed at your selected keywords. Remember, search engines can recognise context and implied meaning, so synonyms are important. Content has several roles to play on your site: • It must provide information to visitors. • It must engage with them. • It must persuade them to do what you want. Content must also send signals of relevance to search engines. You need to use the keywords on the content page in a way that search engines will pick up and users will understand. Previously, each web page used to be optimised for a set number of keywords. With the increasing sophistication of search engines and their semantic awareness, however, pages are now optimised for themes instead. This means that search engines have moved from keywords to concept and context. For example, one page might be optimised for car insurance, with relevant keywords used as required, while another page might be optimised for health insurance, or household insurance.  Search engines consider context in three ways: 1. User intention: Google tries to match your query to what you are asking rather than the individual words used. A search for ‘book about children stranded on island’ gives you Lord of the Flies by William Golding as a result, rather than a page with those specific keywords.
2. Your content: Google reads your pages’ keywords to find out what they are about, conceptually. 3. Relating concepts: Google relates concepts to each other, like showing William Golding as author of Lord of the Flies and offering results that are related to the book and the story of children stranded on an island
While keywords are still useful, focus has shifted from repeatedly using keywords to ensuring that each page is about something specific. Even though you should be thinking ‘customer first’ rather than exact keywords, these terms are still useful. Here are some guidelines:
Title tag: Use the keyword in the title and as close to the beginning as possible. Be mindful that this needs to offer readers clarity and promote users to click through to your website as well. 2. H1 header tag: Use the keyword in the header tag, and as much as possible, in the other H tags, as long as it makes sense to do so from a readability perspective. 3. Body content: Use keywords as long as it makes sense in context. Remember to use synonyms rather than focusing exclusively on one specific version of a keyword. You should aim for as much content as needed in terms of its purpose. Start off with the information that is most commonly needed or searched for. Then, add more content to provide additional information together with sub-headings to give it needed structure. About 350 words of content should be a minimum. Make sure the content is original and insightful with excellent flow and structure. 4. Bold: Use tags around the keyword at least once. 5. URL: Try to use the keyword in your page URL. 6. Meta description: Use it at least once in the meta description of the page, which should also entice users to click through to your site from the SERP. 7. Link anchor text: Try to ensure that the keyword is used in the anchor text of the pages linking to other pages within your website (internal linking) and third-party websites that link to your website. Anchor text provides additional context to search engines and can also be included in sitelinks (the additional links seen within a website’s search result for some search queries). Optimising media Images, video, and other digital assets should be optimised with the relevant keywords. Search engines cannot decipher multimedia content as effectively as text, so they rely on the way that media is described to determine what it is about. Screen readers read out these descriptions, which can help visually impaired users make sense of a website. In addition, media such as images and video are often also shown on the SERPs. Proper optimisation can give a brand more ownership of the SERP real estate and can be used effectively to target competitive terms. Ensure that media usage doesn’t hinder a website’s performance, for example, how quickly a website page loads. Also, users are mobile data sensitive. Auto-playing website videos are usually unpopular, especially if users are using the internet at the office or in a public place. Media should not obstruct users when they visit a website page, for example, a pop-up video shouldn’t cover the whole screen. Just as rich media can help emphasise the content on a page to a visitor, they can help search engines to rank pages, provided they are labelled correctly.
Here are some ways to optimise images with keywords for SEO: • Use descriptive, keyword-filled filenames. • Use specific alt tags and title attributes. • Add meta information to the image. Make sure this information is relevant. • Use descriptive captions and keep relevant copy close to the corresponding media. For example, an image caption and neighbouring text will help to describe the content of the image. • Make sure that the header tags and images are relevant to each other. • Think about what other digital assets you have and whether these can be optimised in line with your keyword strategy. For example, consider using app store optimisation (ASO). ASO is the process of optimising your mobile and web apps for the specific web stores, such as Google Play Store, App Store, and Huawei AppGallery
The best way to ensure results is to focus on writing quality content while sticking to a few guidelines on tags and URLs. Remember, you want high-ranking content that is interesting and engaging for readers. Regularly adding fresh, valuable content will also encourage search engines to crawl your site more frequently.
Use your website and its pages to establish and reinforce themes. Information can always be arranged in some kind of hierarchical structure. Just as a single page can have a heading and then be broken down into subheadings, a large website can have main themes that are broken down into sub-themes. Search engines will see these themes and recognise your website as one with rich content.
5.4.2 Link popularity Links are a vital part of how the internet works. The purpose of a link is to allow a user to go from one web page to another. Search engines, mimicking the behaviour of humans, also follow links. Besides allowing search engine spiders to find websites, links are a way of validating relevance and indicating importance. When one page links to another, it is as if that page is voting or vouching for the destination page. Generally, the more votes a website receives, the more trusted it becomes, the more important it is deemed, and the better it will rank on search engines. Links help send signals of trust. Signals of trust can come only from a third-party source. Few people will trust someone who says, “Don’t worry, you can trust me!” unless someone else, who is already trusted, says, “Don’t worry, I know him well. You can trust him.” It is the same with links and search engines. Trusted sites can transfer trust to unknown sites via links. Links help to validate relevance. The text that makes up a text link can help validate relevance. A link such as ‘Cape Town hotel’ sends the message that, “You can trust that the destination site is relevant to the term ‘Cape Town hotel.’” If the destination web page has already used content to send a signal of relevance, the link simply validates that signal.
Not all links are created equal Of course, not all links are equal. While link volume is the number of links coming to a specific page of your site, link authority looks at the value of the links. Some sites are more trusted than others. Likewise, some sites are more relevant than others to specific terms. The more relevant a site, the more value is transferred by the link. It is more important than ever to avoid your website being associated with spammy links of any kind. ‘Quality’ links are better than a high ‘quantity’ of ‘poor-quality’ links. Well-known and established news sites, government sites (.gov), and university domains (.ac) are examples of sites from which links can carry more weighting. Sites with higher authority carry more link weight