SOCIAL MEDIA STRATEGY
14.1 INTRODUCTION In the previous chapter, we covered some of the major social media platforms, their statistics and features, marketing opportunities, and the three phases involved in using them to reach your customers. These included strategy, implementation, and analytics. Strategy is by far the most important, because it informs what and how often you post and how you choose to engage and relate to your audience. Strategy also informs how and what you will analyse. It is important that all these parameters are clearly established, and that your strategy is informed by the data and analytics you receive based on your content and engagement. Social media can be used to solve business, marketing, and communication challenges; it is an important part of digital marketing. With so many platforms and choices available in social media, this chapter will show you how to use these spaces strategically to address challenges. The last few years have seen a shift in social media strategy. The space is now considered a standard medium for advertising with a far better ability to target consumers. While it is still recommended to build a community on Facebook (or the platform of your choice), there are brands using the platform for effective advertising, without actually having any followers. Despite these changes, effective community and reputation management should remain key considerations in your social media strategy. Planning and thinking strategically, while leaving room to be flexible and respond to analytics and tactical opportunities, are essential to making the most of social media marketing. Kepios.com analysis shows that there were more than 4.62 billion social media users around the world in January 2022 – 58.4% of the total global population. Social media user numbers have seen strong growth over the past 12 months too, with 424 million new users joining social media, which is likely attributed to global lockdowns during the pandemic. The latest figures indicate that well over 9 in 10 internet users now use social media each month (DataReportal, 2022). Creating content for every social media platform is more important now than ever to reach and connect with your audience in a way that’s relevant and appropriate. The figure below provides a high-level view of how to use each platform effectively:
14.3 USING SOCIAL MEDIA TO SOLVE BUSINESS CHALLENGES Strategy is an important aspect of social media planning. Part of that strategy is identifying which business challenges, marketing and communication challenges in particular, your social media will address. These can include:
Communication and outreach • Community management • Support and customer service • Reputation management • Advertising and awareness • Sales and lead generation • Search engine optimisation • Insights and research.
14.3.1 Communication and outreach Social media offers brands effective two-way communication and real-time broadcast channels. This bi-directional communication is what makes social communities so exciting (and challenging). Just as consumers can communicate with each other and send messages to businesses and brands, so businesses and brands can use this medium to communicate with and reach out to the public. Social media is a highly effective public communications tool. Businesses, governments, and other organisations use Twitter and Facebook to broadcast timely messages, allowing interested parties to keep informed in real time. This has become a vital aspect of newsworthy and breaking news events such as elections, disasters, and global sports. Many organisations also use social media tools to broadcast service updates.
14.3.2 Community management Social media platforms are built around communities and are sometimes virtual representations of real-world networks and communities. This feature of social media can be used to build and maintain a supportive community around your organisation. ‘Community manager’ is a role that has risen to prominence as more organisations start using social media, but it has always been an important role in any community, from groups that thrive on forums, to communities run on Facebook. Creating, building, and nurturing a community mean that organisations don’t just participate in conversations that are happening around and about them, but also actively lead and guide those conversations. These communities are generally made up of the organisation’s biggest fans, often called brand evangelists, who believe that they have a big stake in that organisation. This creates an environment where those fans can interact directly with the organisation, and where the organisation can send messages directly to those fans and solicit their feedback.
Building and maintaining a community is a long-term project. It starts with determining what the best platform is for that community; something that already exists like Facebook, or developing a customised new community platform created for the specific brand’s purpose, either from scratch, or using a service like Tribe (tribe.so). 14.3.3 Support and customer service Social media is an additional customer service channel. Consumers are becoming increasingly comfortable transacting online, and they expect the businesses with which they transact to respond to their queries in the social space, as they would do through a call centre or email. Some customers have found that problems or questions on social media tend to be resolved more quickly, as brands are wary of having unresolved issues left out in public. For any organisation that runs a social community, customer service is often one of its primary functions. 
It’s important that brands respond to customer queries or complaints on social media because platforms like Twitter and Facebook keep track of response times. One of the factors that contribute to a brand’s online image is its responsiveness to customer comments. According to Reputation X (Shah, 2021), “Answering a social media complaint can increase customer advocacy by as much as 25%, effectively improving a brand’s reputation”. Interestingly, social media customer service can be collaborative in that customers assist each other and, in this way, reduce the reliance on the organisation for support. 14.3.4 Reputation management Social media is a very effective tool for crisis communication and management. In some instances, it is also the place where crises start. This can be due to offensive content, an employee saying something inappropriate, or even angry customers sharing their complaints and getting reactions. It is important that you manage this effectively to preserve your reputation. Social media policy and guidelines To preserve and protect your online brand reputation and presence, there are a few important things you need to put in place, and a social media policy is one of them. In addition, it is important to include the guidelines and protocols for your brand to ensure consistency and uniformity in how you assist your customers on social media. Hoodsuite describes social media policy as “an official company document that provides guidelines and requirements for your organisation’s social media use. It covers your brand’s official channels, as well as how employees use social media, both personally and professionally” (Newberry and Cooper, 2021). It is essential that brands develop a social media policy to manage what gets published on their social pages, especially when it comes to employees. The primary purpose of this policy is to manage the social media risks your brand may face. Your policy should include: • Employee roles and responsibilities • Security processes and protocols • Plan of action for a security or PR crisis • Outline on complying with the law • Guidelines for employees’ social media accounts and posting • Advocacy guidelines.
To assist in setting social media guidelines, there are a few questions you should ask yourself to facilitate the process: • What is your tone of voice? • What is your ideal response time for each channel? • What FAQs you are going to include? • What is your process for miscellaneous customer issues and escalations? • Will you respond to positive feedback? How? You may also want to create templates to answer frequently asked questions in order to be proactive when responding to social comments and messages. Always tweak your templates to remain personable for each query and to maintain the brand tone of voice.
Social media is a great tool for monitoring what is being said about your brand, and to spot a potential crisis long before it becomes one. Such a ‘heads up’ allows your brand to mediate the crisis by being proactive and preparing for the situation before it takes hold. Being ready in any event is a great space for you to manage your communication because it enables you to get your side of the story out. 14.3.5 Advertising and awareness Where there is an audience, there is advertising. The more time users spend on social media, the more brands want to advertise there. It’s not only the large numbers of active users or the time users spend social networks, it’s the rich demographic and psychographic targeting opportunities that make them appealing to advertisers. Adverts can be targeted based on the profile information that individuals provide, either overtly or through their actions on the social network. Most social networks offer a number of advertising options that are accessible to both small advertisers and big spenders. Social advertising is dynamic, with new advertising options released regularly. To find the platform and ad type that works best for your audience, you should experiment with the different formats and models offered. 14.3.6 Sales and lead generation Adding a social layer to a commercial transaction can create a richer experience for online consumers. These can be based overtly on social connections or on inferred connections based on behaviour. Amazon’s collaborative filtering is an excellent example of the layer based on inferred connections. If you’ve browsed their website, you will no doubt have seen product information, such as ’Frequently bought together’. In real time, based on consumer purchase behaviour, Amazon presents products that you are likely to have an interest in, based on users who browsed and purchased products that you like, or have selected to buy. You may not realise it, but this is a social layer in the online shopping experience. Users benefit because they are exposed to new items that they may not have thought about looking for, making the shopping experience easier and tailored to their needs. The brand benefits from the additional sale on items that the user may not have considered purchasing until they were shown the options. Social communities can also be lead generation or sales generation assets. You may find your friends tagging someone (maybe even you) to a post that they believe will be interesting or useful to them (or you). One way of managing your community to grow your audience base and improve targeting is knowing how to engage with these leads to get them to follow you.
14.3.7 Search engine optimisation (SEO) Social media plays an important role in SEO. It provides additional assets that can be optimised so that a brand ‘owns’ the results page for searches for their brand. A savvy SEO strategy will make use of social media assets, links, and likes for strengthening the position of other web assets in the SERPs. 
With a little bit of planning and keyword research, a brand can use social assets effectively to own searches on their brand name. This ties back neatly to managing their online reputation, too. 14.3.8 Insight and research Social media can be a very powerful insight and research asset, but the information needs to be judged in its proper context. When you are planning a campaign, social media can provide a rich source of data, both demographic and preference based. You can use the information users share freely to understand more about your market, brand, or product. ORM tools help you to track mentions and sentiment, giving you insight on how you are perceived by consumers. Using social network ad planners, like Facebook’s Ads manager, can give you rich information about the size of your market and things that consumers like. You can measure sentiment andthe changing number of mentions to help you understand the impact of other campaigns. Google Trends is another useful tool for people’s search behaviour. It offers keyword-related data based on searches by volume and geographical data. Building your online community gives you a group you can reach out to for information and feedback through an always-on online focus group. Remember though, that these users are inherently biased just by the fact that they would join your social community. Social data is valuable, but must be treated correctly. It offers qualitative and quantitative information and, in many ways, provides secondary research. For research purposes, it can and should be used to help form research questions to gain further insights. 14.4 STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE TO CREATING A SOCIAL MEDIA STRATEGY Social media is fast-moving, which means proper planning is vital to success. Effective social media strategies come from embracing the fact that social media is a two-way communication tool. Organisations need the resources to not only push messages out, but to quickly manage messages coming in. Planning is the foundation of success. Here is one method of approaching social media strategically: Step 1: Get buy-in Getting buy-in for using social media is essential. It may be seen as a free resource, but even if you are not paying for exposure, there is a time and resource investment required. A number of stakeholders will need to be aware of your social media plans, and these may be both internal and external. Of course, you will need sign-off on any budgeting or additional resourcing requirements. Addressing the various stakeholders will also force you to do the necessary research and planning to take the next steps. Step 2: Listen and understand the landscape Social media provides a wealth of publicly available information and data that is useful for your strategy. A good first step to understanding the full social media landscape is to listen closely to conversations your target market is already having around your brand or industry, and monitoring what your competitors are up to on their pages. Some important questions to answer include: • What conversation already exists around your brand, your industry, and your competitors? • Do they have the facts? • Where does it take place? • Who is doing most of the talking? • What are the emotions involved in conversations about your brand? • What are the motivations of those that comment on your brand online? • What can you, as a brand, add to this conversation? Is it valuable? Online monitoring tools, such as DataEQ (dataeq.com) can help you with the listening part of your planning but, in the early stages, you may want to start with free tools like Google Alerts (google.com/alerts). Step 3: Analyse Using all the data that you have been gathering, make the time to analyse. Think critically about social media and your brand, as well as your brand’s broader marketing, communication, and business challenges. All of this should be considered in the context of the information that you already know about your local marketing and business environment. The outcomes that you should look at include: • A list of the social channels and platforms your brand should be on, based on who your customers are, where they interact, and where they expect to interact with you • Non-official groups or communities that already exist, which may have been created by fans • An overview of the existing conversation (volume, frequency, and sentiment), as well as any content or conversation themes that occur • An overview of what your competitors are doing in this space • A list of potential brand evangelists and influencers in your industry. Step 4: Set objectives Your objectives are the desired outcome of your social media strategy. Your ultimate objective, as to what social media should achieve for your business, should be established upfront and be based on the context of your marketing and business challenges. Once the listening and analysing phase is complete, you can set specific social media objectives that will feed into your overall outcome. You need to identify exactly how you will use social media to reach the business objectives for your organisation, and then set SMART objectives that will help you to achieve these. To make them tangible and measurable, establish key performance indicators (KPIs) for your objectives, with benchmarks and targets where appropriate. Determine SMART objectives as shown below.
Your objective, for example, could be to grow a community of fans around your brand in a particular country. Therefore, your KPI might be fan numbers, and you could set a target of 5 000 Facebook fans over six months. This gives you a measurable goal to achieve within a given time period that can be monitored. Step 5: Create an action plan Once you have a clear idea of what you want, you can begin compiling an action plan to get there. This is where you need to make sure that you have created the necessary documents and processes that form the foundation of your plan. Remember to keep your chosen platform in mind when making these plans. You will need to: • Decide on the roles and responsibilities of the project team and other stakeholders • Determine what social media tools you will use • Commit to a frequency and volume of activity, and how quickly you will respond • Develop a content calendar and conversation plan • Create tone of voice guidelines, frequently asked questions, community guidelines, and content plans. Step 6: Implement Putting everything into action is the fun part. Now that you have all of your research and plans in place, it’s time to set up your platforms according to the specific guidelines for each. Most platforms have helpful and informative guidance for businesses that want to be on their site. They also provide brand packs and assistance in establishing yourself on the site. Get your first followers on board by alerting your stakeholders that you are starting your engagement plans, and make sure that you have tracking in place. Continue to monitor mentions of your organisation and responses to your messages. Keep to your general plan, but be prepared to adjust as needed.
Step 7: Track, analyse, optimise The beautiful thing about digital marketing is that you can track every single user interaction and use this information to learn from, and continually improve, your efforts. You should track the success of your social media campaigns on an ongoing basis and set milestones for your team at less frequent intervals (every couple of months or so), when you will sit down and do an in-depth review. There are several tools you can use for tracking social media. You will need to build a suite of tools to suit your measurement and reporting requirements. Platform insights From the previous chapter, you saw how each major platform offers its own analytics to businesses and brands that sign up for business pages or profiles. These are a useful starting point for reporting on your social media efforts, from numbers of followers or fans, to time of day when your audience is most active and interact with the content you share. Web analytics If you are using social media channels to send traffic to your own website, you should tag the links so that you can segment that traffic in your website reports. In Google Analytics (google.com/analytics), you would use campaign tracking parameters. URL Shorteners URL shortening services, such as bit.ly, goo.gl and Hootsuite offer usage data that will tell you how many users click on links you share, when they click on them, and where in the world they are located. UTM parameters UTM parameters are just short pieces of code that you can add to links, for example, the links you share in your social posts. They include information about the link’s placement and purpose, making it easier to track clicks and traffic from a specific social media post or campaign (Newberry and Cooper, 2021). UTM parameters help you to analyse how each of the marketing channels you have invested in, such as search, display, or social, have contributed to your campaign. You will be able to see which channel sent the most number of users to your site, what the conversion rate of the various channels are, and which channel offers the best return on investment. You can also organise your data so that you can compare different campaigns to assess content, timing and distribution platforms. They are invaluable tools (Kissmetrics, 2016). Note the UTM tag at the end of the URL.
Online monitoring software Online monitoring software, also known as sentiment analysis or opinion mining software, is an important measurement investment that you may need to make. It helps you to keep track of all mentions of your brand and understand the sentiment and influence of those mentions. You should be tracking your reputation for trends and changes over time. Some popular choices are: DataEQ (dataeq.com), Brandwatch (brandwatch.com), SEMRUSH (semrush.com), and Hootsuite (hootsuite.com).
Social media dashboards There are a number of services that make it easier for you to centralise management of your social media properties and make collaborative management easier. They also integrate analytics data from a number of sources, making reporting easier.
14.5 DOCUMENTS AND PROCESSES The foundations of social media success and your social strategy is likely to involve many stakeholders from across your organisation. Good documentation, processes, and guidelines ensure consistency across the various channels. These should be created, agreed on, and approved before you take any action on social media. Start with the documentation and processes you already have in place for marketing and communication, for example, brand and tone of voice guidelines, or PR policies. Build on these to create a robust foundation that suits this spontaneous, dynamic space. A good starting point is a social media checklist to make sure that you have everything in place. Examples of the checklist, conversation calendars, and escalation protocols are shown below
14.5.1 Community guidelines As well as a privacy policy and terms and conditions, it’s a good idea to establish community guidelines for the communities you manage, especially when the community is on behalf of a brand. Community guidelines help to set the tone for the community and are useful to refer to should members behave in a way that is undesirable. Guidelines indicate what will and will not be tolerated, such as hate speech, profanity, discrimination, or other inappropriate content. Community guidelines don’t prevent such behaviour, but are useful to fall back on should you need to remove comments or community members from your social page. Guidelines should be friendly, with the tone in keeping with your community or brand. Many social media platforms provide their own guidelines that all users, including brands, have to adhere to. Failure to adhere to any of the guidelines may get you removed from the platform.
Guidelines should not only include information about how and who to report violations to, but also recommendations for member’s conduct and the types of material that can and cannot be shared. Methods for members to protect their personal information and intellectual property are important things to include.
14.5.2 Content plan Content plans help you to plan your community conversations and the messages you send. We suggest aligning your content with your objectives. Decide on what you want to achieve with each objective, by when, and what level of priority it is for your business. Map these objectives weekly and monthly as necessary. Then create weekly or monthly content plans around these objectives, based on each objective’s relative priority for your business per week. For example, if your objectives are brand awareness, sales, and app installs, you need to weigh them according to their importance. If your main objective on social media is brand awareness, make this 50% of your content plan. This means that 50% of all content you post will be aimed at increasing brand awareness. If the other two objectives are equivalent, then content driving sales and content driving app installs should each make up 25% of your content plan. If this changes over time, so that in week three, you want app installs to be your most important objective, then content driving app installs becomes 50% of your content plan, with content promoting brand awareness dropping down to making up only 25% of your content plan. Content plans are useful, centralised planning documents that ensure that various teams are aware of each other’s efforts and that communications are integrated. For any kind of content and communication strategy, content plans are invaluable. Be sure your content plan speaks to your objective, your brand identity, your chosen target audience, and the themes or topics you have selected. Reaching social audiences requires that you create content that truly resonates with them. Successful social content must be interesting, relevant, shareable, and authentic. It is especially useful to plan and create social content around your content pillars, since this gives you a solid structure and starting point to follow. To start creating a conversation calendar, you should plot everything that is relevant to your community. This could include public events, dates and anniversaries, or events and communications already planned by your organisation. You should also use your conversation calendar for reporting. Keeping track of interactions and responses to your planned posts will help you to determine what kind of posts your community responds to, what days are best for posting, and what frequency works best for your community. CoSchedule.com, a content marketing editorial calendar software, provides some guidance on how often to post on each platform. Some platforms like Twitter and Pinterest require frequents posts each day, while Facebook, Instagram and LinkedIn require less posts (CoSchedule Blog, 2022). However, with platform algorithms changing all the time, the frequency of posts is becoming less important. A great post will circulate and appear in newsfeeds for much longer, because it has good relevant content.