INTRODUCTION
Where there is a product or service, there must be a way to get it into a customer’s hands. Some of the primary functions of marketing include planning, promoting, persuading, managing channels and information, pricing, product service management, and selling. Digital marketing offers a unique opportunity to tailor marketing campaigns to target specific customers. If done properly, this can result in a higher return on investment (ROI), which is the ratio of cost to profit. Digital marketing also allows for more scope in terms of branding and public relations through content marketing. However, this also poses risk. The internet moves fast, and reputational damage is possible in a heartbeat if campaigns and digital marketing strategies are not carefully thought out and planned. In this chapter, you will be introduced to digital marketing, creating a foundation on which you can build your digital marketing strategy.
WHAT IS MARKETING?
Marketing is the creation and satisfaction of demand for your product, service, or idea. If marketing is successful, it will create demand; this demand should translate into sales and, ultimately, revenue. Kotler (2012) described marketing as follows:
The science and art of exploring, creating, and delivering value to satisfy the needs of a target market at a profit. Marketing identifies unfulfilled needs and desires. It defines, measures, and quantifies the size of the identified market and the profit potential.
The American Marketing Association (2017) defines marketing as follows:
The activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for customers, clients, partners, and society at large.
The design of the product or service itself is, arguably, a function of marketing – this is where meaningful benefits and value for the customer are created. Once the product or service exists, you need to get it into customers’ hands and motivate them to pay for it. Even better, you need to convince the customer that your product, service, or organisation is superior to your competitors. To do this, you need to convince the customer of your product’s benefits and value. The value that a marketer should seek to create should be equal to or even greater than the cost of the product to the consumer. Doing this often and consistently will grow trust in and loyalty towards the brand and create strong brand equity.
Business goals
The goal of a business is to sell services and products to generate a profit. Marketing is the sum total of activities and strategies that a business undertakes to encourage people and other businesses to buy (and continue buying) its products and services. Every business benefits from marketing, and each one needs to create a tailored mix of approaches and tactics that suit it, its budget, its offering, and its target customers.
Marketing enables customers to buy products by fulfilling the following roles:
Awareness: Marketing lets people know about brands and products. Customers can’t buy something they don’t know about. Therefore the first essential role of marketing is to raise awareness of an offering among the target group who is likely to buy it.
Information: Marketing tells people when, where, and how to buy products. Once a person knows about a product, they need some basic information in order to buy it. A brand’s marketing strategy should always include information that enables customers to easily make a purchase.
Persuasion: Marketing makes people want a product. Once someone knows a product exists, they need to be convinced that it is worth their time, money, and effort to obtain it. Marketing strives to create an emotional connection between person and product or brand.
Affinity: Marketing makes people love brands and products. A customer is much more likely to buy a product that makes them feel great, shares their values, and entertains them. Many established brands focus their marketing efforts on building and improving sentiment – just think about how passionate Apple, adidas, or Tabasco fans are about their favourite brands, and what an impact this can have on their success.
The role of marketing is to inform, entice, educate, excite, and persuade people to buy services or products. Marketing aims to influence the perceptions of people in favour of the brand and its offering, with the ultimate goal of getting them to make a purchase (and continue to make purchases in the future and to become return customers). It does this through two complementary approaches:
Factual: This approach appeals to the intellect and relies on clear facts, features, benefits, and rational arguments that indicate why a product is a good choice, for example: “This solar heater lets you save 60% off your monthly electricity bill.”
Emotional: This approach relies on tapping into people’s feelings, aspirations, hopes, fears and dreams to encourage emotive, impulse purchases, for example: “This solar heater could be your contribution to saving the environment and protecting the planet we live on.”
One of the most important concepts for marketers to internalise is that people don’t buy products; they buy what the product can do for them, how it makes them feel, or what it says about them.
Nobody buys a hammer for the sake of owning a hammer; they are buying the ability to repair a broken appliance, enjoy some hobby DIY, or appear capable. A TAGHeuer wristwatch doesn’t do anything a Casio couldn’t, but it indicates a person who values masculinity, innovation, and precision.
Extrapolating from this, marketing is about showing your potential customers how your offering can make them awesome, successful, and better.
The first step to developing a marketing strategy is to understand your environment, your customers, and how to access these customers.
UNDERSTANDING YOUR ENVIRONMENT
Your brand does not exist in a vacuum. There are multiple factors affecting your business right at this very moment. Your business has control over some of these elements, while it has no control over others.
Micro factors
Micro factors are mostly internal elements or factors that you and your business have some control over, such as your brand, your brand or product’s unique selling point (USP), and any digital offerings.
It should be noted that, while you have some control over micro factors that affect your business, these are informed by macro factors. It is important to keep this in mind when you are doing any kind of strategic planning, or simply day-to-day brand management. You could say that macro factors are the ‘bigger picture,’ while micro factors are the details. You need to keep an eye on the bigger picture without losing sight of the details, and vice versa.

1.5 WHAT IS DIGITAL MARKETING? How does digital marketing fit into this definition? There is, in fact, no difference between ‘traditional’ marketing and digital marketing. They are one and the same, apart from digital being specific to a medium. Ultimately, the aim of any type of marketing is to keep and grow a customer base and stimulate sales in the future. Digital communication tools contribute to connecting and building long-term relationships with customers. What is digital? A participatory layer of all media that allows users to self-select their own experiences, and affords marketers the ability to bridge media, gain feedback, iterate their message, and collect relationships (Caddell, 2013). Digital is a way of exploring content and ideas (for users) and connecting with and understanding customers (for marketers). Digital marketing is powerful in two fundamental ways. Firstly, the audience can be segmented very precisely, even down to factors like current location and recent brand interactions, which means that messages can (and must) be personalised and tailored for them.
Secondly, the digital sphere is almost completely measurable. Every minute and every click by a customer can be accounted for. In digital marketing, you can see exactly how various campaigns are performing, which channels bring the most benefit, and where your efforts are best focused. Cumulatively, access to data that measures the whole customer experience should lead to data-driven decision making. 1.5.1 The digital audience In the simplest terms, a digital audience is your online target audience. The COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a marked shift in the way people access the things they want and need. While people were increasingly moving online in many parts of the world, they were looking for specific products and services. People still sought out many, if not most, products and services in traditional ways. For example, a person may do bulk shopping on a website such as Amazon, but do their daily grocery shopping at an actual store. Or, a person may from time-to-time purchase clothing on sites such as Alibaba or Shein, but still visit clothing stores for unique pieces. However, during the lockdowns that followed the outbreak of COVID-19, people were forced to move most, if not all, of their shopping online in some way. For instance, there was a huge spike in on-demand grocery delivery services, as this was safer and more convenient. In South Africa, one of the largest supermarket chains, Checkers, launched their on-demand delivery app and service, Checkers Sixty60, months before hard lockdown was announced in March 2020. This service met the needs of a population but, more than that, it simplified a chore that is generally quite tedious. The service was a huge success, with competitors scrambling to catch up. Even after lockdown regulations were eased, many customers continued to use the service regularly. Convenience and speed are driving customers online more and more. The rise of social media and the internet of things (IoT) has also increased the rate of a migration to digital. Customers have certain expectations, and one of these is that they are able to investigate, access, acquire, and talk about a product or service online. Like any target audience, it is important to be as specific as possible when it comes to reaching out. It is tempting to consider your digital audience as a homogenous group and only one segment of your overall audience, but the past decade has shown that this is not an effective strategy. 1.5.2 Data-driven decision making A benefit of digital marketing is that you do not have to theorise, guess, or rely on ‘gut feel’ in pursuit of customers who want and will pay for your product or service. The internet provides real-time data, which you can use to improve your business and marketing decisions. You can use data to be: • Descriptive: Use raw data to describe the market. • Diagnostic: Find out ‘why’ and look for patterns. • Predictive: Analyse data, both past and current, to predict future sales, revenue, and market changes. • Prescriptive: Use the findings of the previous three types of data analytics to determine a possible solution to a problem, thereby delivering value
In addition to having access to more raw data than ever before, which is current and based on user behaviour, the internet makes it possible for a business to pivot, or to change direction, far more quickly. This agility allows for a business to meet actual needs and current trends, rather than perceived needs and desires. Two major data-collection trends that are relevant and useful for digital marketing are the rise of social media and the ‘internet of me’.
Social media Briefly, social media refers to social networking sites and apps, such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and TikTok. The content on these platforms is, by and large, user generated, however, social media advertising has been a fast-growing marketing option since the mid-2000s. Social media allows customers to be part of a conversation, which can drive interest to a business’s social media profile, their website, or even a brick-and-mortar store. In addition, social media makes it possible for the collection of big data, as well as user-specific data. The internet of me The ‘internet of me’ is a broad term, which refers to technology that allows people to take their bodies and minds online. At present, this includes: • Self-tracking technology on smartphones or smartwatches (i.e., Clue or Flo, which a woman can use to track their menstrual cycle). • Wearable technology (i.e., Apple watches, Garmin, Fitbit, which track everything from a user’s sleep patterns to their heart rate throughout the day). Tied to the ability to gather and mine more data, the ‘internet of me’ is also creating unique opportunities for marketers to find, target, impress, and retain customers. Smartwatches, for example, allow users to input data to track everything from exercise to menstrual cycles to calorie consumption. Many smartwatches also track personal data in the background, such as sleep or heart rate. 1.6 MARKETING AND THE INTERNET The complete scope of digital marketing is practised on the internet. Products and services are positioned and promoted, purchased, distributed, and serviced. The web provides consumers with more choice, more influence, and more power. On the internet, brands constantly have: • New ways of selling • New products and services to sell • New markets to which they can sell.
Digital marketing helps to create consumer demand by using the power of the interconnected, interactive web. It enables the exchange of currency but, more than that, it enables the exchange of attention for value.
If marketing creates and satisfies demand, digital marketing drives the creation of demand using the power of the internet and satisfies this demand in new and innovative ways. A brand on the internet can gain value in the form of time, attention, and advocacy from the consumer. For the user, value can be added in the form of entertainment, education, and utility. Brands build loyalty among users who love their products or services and must align with users’ values and aspirations. Users fall in love with products and services when their experience is tailored to their needs, and not the needs of the brand. The internet makes this possible by closing the gap between who creates the product and who uses the product. In this way, customers themselves become part of the marketing project. 1.6.1 Understanding the internet There is no doubt about it: the internet has changed the world we live in. Never before has it been so easy to access information, communicate with people all over the globe, and share articles, videos, photos, and all manner of media. But, what is the internet? And how has it changed marketing? The internet is, simply, a network of networks. Its proliferation has led to an increasingly connected communications environment. Not only does the internet offer marketers wider audience reach, it also allows for tracking and data gathering, which can inform future campaigns and, even, product development. What started as pop-up ads on basic webpages has become far more sophisticated and powerful. The internet has certainly moved on from its early beginnings, and marketers are well positioned to reap the benefits
The internet is almost ubiquitous in today’s world. Even in less economically developed countries, digital marketing is possible, and effective, because of social media access. This is primarily driven by the rise in smartphones and more affordable data in most countries. People who were previously excluded from using the internet because they did not have access to a computer or internet connection, now have access to the internet and social media on their phones. Look at Figure 1.2 below, which shows the number of unique mobile phone users, internet users, and active social media users. Almost 60% of the world’s population uses the internet, and just over 50% of the world’s population is active on social media.

1.6.2 How people access the internet People connect to the internet and access content in many different ways. When it comes to the physical connection to the internet, the market presents a number of options, such as Dial-up, 3G, 4G, and 5G connection, wifi and WiMAX, Broadband, and ADSL. The devices people use to access the internet vary from mobile phones and tablets, to personal notebooks and desktop computers. The environment that people are in when they access the internet also differs. People can access and use the internet: • At home • At the office, or place of work • At a library • At school, college, university, or other education centre
• At an internet café • On the go (using portable devices, such as mobile phones, laptops, or tablets). Not only do these environmental factors affect how people use the internet, but their reasons for using the internet also have an effect on how they interact online. For some people, the internet is primarily a communications channel, and their online activity is focused on social media or their email inbox. For others, it may be a research channel, with search engines playing a large role in their online experience. 1.6.3 What does the internet have to do with marketing? The growth of internet usage has resulted in declining distribution of traditional media, such as television, radio, newspapers, and magazines. These were once important marketing channels, as they offered a way for marketers to connect with audiences. Consider this example: In the late 1980s through the early 2000s, many families watched television on a daily basis. They had limited options when deciding how, when, and where to watch programmes on television. Over an hour, the show may have had six to seven ad breaks, which the viewer was forced to watch – they did not have the ability to fast-forward through the ads. However, as the internet has become more and more ubiquitous, and as data has become more affordable, streaming has become the preferred way to watch television. When a viewer is streaming a show, there are no ad breaks or, at least, the viewer has the option to fast-forward and ignore them. So, where marketers once had a captive audience (the television viewer), this model has changed, necessitating a shift in how companies tell customers about their products. The rise of streaming platforms, such as Netflix, has necessitated a shift in how marketers reach customers that they previously would have had contact with through TV advertising. The way people use their devices, such as their laptops, mobile phones, or desktop computers, also influences marketing activities and campaigns. For example, if your target audience is the parents of small children and your research has turned up the fact that most of your customers use a social media app, such as Facebook, after their children have gone to bed, it would affect your scheduling. In this case, hosting a live Facebook event at 6 p.m., when most parents are cooking dinner and getting children ready for bed, would not be well attended and would not have the desired reach. However, scheduling it in for 8 p.m. will be far more successful. It may also mean that all parents attend, instead of just the primary caregiver. In this example, you want to give parents less to worry about. Your scheduling should therefore be practical, and the technical aspects of the event should be seamless. If parents struggle to log in or register, they will rather not bother; it’s just one more thing to add to their to-do list. By really considering your target audience, you can eliminate potential problems before they even arise. This will result in a successful campaign and goodwill towards your brand

1.6.4 What makes online marketing so special? This is not to say that advertising should be solely online. Your online and offline marketing efforts are not separate. These two should ideally work in conjunction with each other. You may think that you don’t need to put effort into your digital marketing because people don’t buy as much online, but this is rapidly changing. Many brands are starting to concentrate on their online presence as much as their offline presence. Over the past few decades, marketers have begun to wake up to the power of the internet, both as a platform for communication and as a way of tracking conversations. Marketing is about conversations, and the internet facilitates these on a global scale.