CONTENT MARKETING STRATEGY
9.1 INTRODUCTION While the phrase ‘content is king’ has been referenced for some time, it is only in the last decade that content marketing strategy has been solidified into a discipline of its own. Defining content marketing strategy can be tricky, however, with some practitioners focusing more on the role it plays in information architecture, and others believing that it should be considered on a campaign-by-campaign basis. This chapter looks at content marketing strategy from a holistic perspective, as a process that includes an understanding of all the content your brand is creating, those for whom it is intended, and for what purpose. Content marketing is important for positioning your brand in the minds of consumers. As a content marketer, you need to understand the brand and consumer context and be able to craft appropriate content based on user receptiveness and channel appropriateness. You also need to select the best route to customer in terms of tactics and understand how content marketing fits and contributes to your overall marketing strategy. Ultimately, the design and the content should motivate the user enough to share the content with others.
9.3 DEFINING CONTENT MARKETING Content marketing is an umbrella term that focuses on matching content (information, inspiration, or entertainment) to your customer needs at whichever stage they are in the buying cycle or customer journey. Unlike TV, where the advertiser pushes messages to a captive audience, the focus is on engaging content, which means that marketers must think like publishers (attracting an audience) rather than seeing themselves as advertisers (buying an audience) of a product. The internet has, in many respects, cut out the middleman. Consumers and brands can now connect directly through a number of easily accessible online platforms. Defining this form of marketing, the Content Marketing Institute offers the following definition: Content marketing is a strategic marketing approach focused on creating and distributing valuable, relevant, and consistent content to attract and retain a clearly-defined audience — and, ultimately, to drive profitable customer action (Content Marketing Institute, 2017). This description applies to all the spaces you share content: both traditional and digital. This includes printed magazines, booklets, and promotional material, as well as your social media space, website, campaigns, competitions, and company blog. The way that information is shared is also important. Kristina Halvorson (2010) suggests this model for approaching the different areas of content marketing strategy:
When creating content it is necessary to ask and answer the following questions: Content components • Substance: Who are you trying to reach, and why? • Structure: Where is your content? How is it organised? How do people find your content? People components • Workflow: How does your content happen? • Governance: Do you know the politics, guidelines, and standards that your brand operates in? (Halvorson, 2010). As you can see, Halvorson suggests that one consider the bigger picture of content creation rather than just the product, which is the end result. Content marketing looks at staff, tools, processes, and outcomes. The end goal for these processes is conversion. All content should be created with a strategic outcome in mind. Such outcomes could include talkability, referral, affinity, and, ultimately, purchase or increased usage of your product or service. 9.4 STRATEGIC BUILDING BLOCKS Before you create any content, you need to look at the strategic building blocks that underpin your company’s narrative. Let’s unpack this. 9.4.1 Translating your brand essence The brand essence sums up the unique attributes of a brand and the basis for its emotional connection with customers. Remember that your emotional connection with your customer is the very thing that differentiates your brand from your competitors. Your brand essence should help to define a tone of voice for your label and the style in which it engages with its customers. The brand essence can be a useful guide for ensuring that the content you create (and your marketing activity) represents the brand appropriately. You can relate this to your brand story. What is your reason for being? How do you connect that with the interests of your customers? What is the value you add to your customers’ lives? Is it convenience, health, status? Consider a brand like Mercedes Benz. Their essential product is transportation, but the brand offers so much more than that to its customers. For example, it provides a sense of safety and security; customers know they are driving a car with the latest safety technology. But the brand’s most powerful aspect is the sense of achievement and status that owning a Mercedes Benz provides. The value of the brand is less about the product itself and transporting passengers, and more about the feeling and status the customer gets by owning the product. ‘Will It Blend?’ is a video series by Blendtec, which builds on this principle. Blendtec produces industrial blenders. Their value proposition is that they can blend anything. Their viral marketing campaign consists of a series of infomercials demonstrating the Blendtec line of blenders. In the show, Blendtec founder Tom Dickson attempts to blend various unusual items in order to show off the power of his blender
9.4.2 Market research and consumer personas The sweet spot for content marketing lies in an intercept between the marketing goals of a brand, the brand personality as it guides and differentiates that brand in the marketplace, and the consumer motivation for paying any attention to a brand at all. One device that is used in addressing consumer needs is the development of a consumer persona. A persona is a profile that a writer creates to embody the aggregated characteristics of the target audience for whom they are writing. It helps to personalise the brand. Personas are based on the profile of users of your content. Creating a profile is all about considering the characteristics of your customers and their needs and desires. For example, a brand like Philadelphia Cream Cheese could have a couple of customer personas. On the one hand, it can represent a busy father, who works full time, but still wants to provide healthy and nutritious lunches for his family. On the other hand, it can represent a young foodie, who wants to try new recipes she finds online from international celebrity chefs to impress her friends at dinner parties. Each persona would require slightly different approaches when developing content. Both would benefit from videos featuring recipes. But while one would likely appreciate regular, basic options for lunchboxes, the other would probably prefer a celebrity endorsement or a celebrity-hosted video featuring finer, more elaborate meals. It’s important to focus on the motivations of the persona that you may create, rather than exterior signifiers that lead to the creation of a stereotype. With this in mind, reconsider the above personas. A busy father, who works fulll time, may still be interested in creating elaborate, healthy, and nutritous lunches. Similarly, consider the gendered binary here (i.e. men don’t have time to cook, women have all the time). The persona assists you in segmenting and understanding your target market and is a framework through which you can guide any content that you create. 9.4.3 Creating content themes Linked to the brand identity are certain themes or concepts. These are areas of focus that support the creation of content that match a consumer’s interest. These themes must be true to the brand essence, not focused directly on sales, and should also speak to the interests of the audience 
Consider Coca-Cola, for example; consumer interests filtered through the brand essence of ‘taste the feeling’ could result in themes such as refreshment, joy, friendship, and enjoyment. These themes are then used as the basis on which to develop content ideas.
In the above tweet, we can see how a particular content theme was translated into a question that is focused on relationships and family. It also encourages engagement from the audience by asking for their input. Another example which demonstrates this is how Corona beer brought their brand essence to life through an interactive documentary. The essence of the brand is to live the extraordinary and provide amazing experiences to its customers. The documentary depicted a group of people from Bulin in China, officially the town furthest away from any ocean in the world, encountering the ocean for the very first time. A truly extraordinary and amazing experience, facilitated by Corona. You can view it here: coronaextra.eu. 9.4.4 Matching content formats to objectives Information can be presented through any number of mediums, which is both an opportunity and a challenge faced by content marketers. Traditional print distribution allows for magazines, pamphlets, and even events. Digital distribution allows for videos, images, interactive infographics, GIFs, live photos, live video, cinemagraphs, and any number of other formats. To gain and keep the attention of consumers/users, it’s sometimes not enough to rely simply on text-based forms of content. The role of the content marketer is to select the right medium based on overall objectives, production capabilities, and the needs of the audience. Consider Figure 9.5 on the next page, which illustrates different forms of content that support different objectives. As discussed in Chapter 4: Strategy, determining your objectives is an essential part of your marketing planning; it should feed into your content marketing strategy, and ultimately the business strategy. Understanding the journey your consumers go through as they approach your sales goal will enable you to match content formats to their needs. A humorous video may be successful in initially making potential customers aware of your brand. However, once you have their attention, a research paper or useful case study could be more effective in convincing them that you are the best choice in the market.
9.4.5 The content audit Once you have established your marketing goals, your brand personality, and a guiding understanding of who you are trying to reach, the content audit is a necessary but sometimes laborious next step. The content audit involves a review of all the existing content supplied by the brand, such as the website, white papers, articles, videos, and content shared on social media sites. An assessment can then be made of how well these pieces of content match the strategic needs of the brand, its audience, and the appropriateness to the chosen channel. While you can either thoroughly immerse yourself in this process or attempt to get a more time-efficient overview, the goal is to map what is currently on offer versus what is needed to achieve the strategic objective. It is important not just to understand what you have and who accesses it, but also how it is currently organised, through which channels, and how often it is accessed by your audience. Many practitioners suggest the use of a spreadsheet to achieve this. Content can be found to be either mismatched to the goals of the organisation or spot on. Most importantly, you can establish what is missing. Are your customer needs being addressed? Where do the opportunities lie? 9.5 CONTENT CREATION In 1995 Steve Jobs famously said: “There’s just a tremendous amount of craftsmanship in between a great idea and a great product” (Harris, 2019). It can be easy to assume content creators simply generate imaginative ideas, write (or record) them, and then publish them as a blog post, email message, or other content piece. Let’s dive deeper into creating compelling content, and how to leverage this for maximum engagement with your customers. 9.5.1 Learning from publishers Referring to a brand as a publisher refers to expanding the function of the marketer or brand manager, and opening up additional opportunities to influence and/or convert. Rather than focusing on the immediate sale or conversion, a publisher focuses on value and interest for the user and building a relationship based on supplying information, inspiration, or entertainment that suits the customer’s needs. Makeup.com by L’Oreal is an oft-cited example of a brand publishing useful tips and content that does not link to a product or sales directly, but demonstrates how the brand can facilitate the lifestyle consumers desire or aspire to. In content marketing, a brand has to give customers more than just the product or service.
9.5.2 Resource planning – thinking like a publisher Content marketing touches on a number of departments in an organisation. Marketing, sales, customer service, corporate communications, human resources, and website management teams should all be aware of the content marketing strategy for a business. Coordinating content between these teams can be challenging, if not impossible, if turnaround times are tight. This is why it is important not only to look at where content production should live in your organisation, but also to map the workflow of content creation, an essential function. Are designers involved? Where does quality control take place? Where can a piece of content be adapted and reused on a different distribution channel? Some organisations opt to have a central role for someone to oversee content; others build in-house departments. Factors to consider are budget, creative control, approval and sign off processes, objective perspectives, and full-time versus freelance resources. Whether you are outsourcing to a publishing house or training a team in house, the decision must be made and planned for so that workflow can be mapped to facilitate your strategic needs. 9.5.3 ‘Always-on’ content planning Given that a large part of the global population is constantly engaging with content via various digital devices and platforms, it is necessary to consider content creation in terms of not only short campaign bursts, but ongoing delivery and engagement. Consider the illustration below
By constantly engaging with audiences, which is well suited to social media, for example, it is possible to build and maintain a relationship with customers/users. As illustrated in Figure 9.7 constant engagement is built by a constant presence and amplified by shorter-term campaigns. 9.5.4 Content models Your organisation’s content requirements and objectives should determine the structure of your content teams. Do you have a need for ongoing content creation, or are there less frequent, high-input forms of content that will benefit your organisation? There are many models that are constantly evolving, so invest in some research around what will suit your organisation. We have outlined two approaches below, namely stock and flow. Stock and flow Stock content refers to bigger, beautiful assets that require more investment and age well, meaning that they will be interesting in six months as well as today. ‘Inside Chanel’ by Chanel, is an example of this. High-production value documentary type videos are created and sponsored by the brand to achieve awareness and develop brand affinity across its target market
Flow content has a lower production value and a quicker production and publishing time frame. Images depicting what is going on at a business on any given day, for example, freshly baked goods at a bakery, can be placed in this category. Weekly or even daily blogs, as well as event and holiday themed content, would all be considered flow. Both types of content should be considered for balancing out a content strategy. It can also be useful to consider destination and distributed content, i.e., content that you are either sending out to the world through various platforms and networks, or which pulls your user towards a page on your website or an article on your blog. Rather than focusing solely on driving users to your owned media spaces, such as your website, consider how to create content that engages with your target audience in the spaces and platforms they use online
9.6 CONTENT CHANNEL DISTRIBUTION There’s no return on investment if your content doesn’t reach viewers and readers. Engaging content needs to reach the customer, otherwise all your efforts are in vain. It is not a case of loading more keywords in your content; you also need to understand what constitutes high-quality content for the major search engine’s algorithms. 9.6.1 Algorithmic curation Algorithmic curation is a term that refers to the algorithms that platforms have created for dealing with information overload. Various platforms, like Facebook, Twitter, and the search engine Google, use algorithms to filter out the amount of information that is delivered to users. Each algorithm will use a number of factors to determine what is actually relevant and interesting to the user doing a search or looking at their news feed. One of the factors that influences whether a piece of content is considered relevant is how much an individual engages with the brand’s presence on that platform over time. Posts shared by a Facebook page, for example, may reach only users who have previously engaged with posts from that page through commenting or liking. It is therefore important to create content that encourages engagement and sharing. Increasingly, SEO and content marketing have to work together if they are to reach their audience and achieve their objectives. Without good content, SEO will struggle, and without SEO even good content will not be seen. SEO approaches content differently to content marketing. SEO wants the content as narrow and focused as possible, so that they can give the right answer to the right user while users are searching. It also recognises the need for enjoyable, shareable content, as this improves search rankings and earns backlinks. Content marketers, however, prefer broader content that focuses on the quality and exposing the content appropriately (Postan, 2016).
9.6.2 Understanding channels and platforms Understanding the channels through which you share content is as important as the crafting of that content itself. Reaching people effectively will only be achieved if the medium supports the message and vice versa. Social media, email marketing, mobile marketing, and video marketing are just some disciplines that form part of your content creation arsenal. The rest of this book is dedicated to best practice in communicating effectively through the various digital disciplines available to you. 9.7 TOOLS OF THE TRADE In order to support the ongoing production of interesting content, it is necessary to have some planning documents in place. Consider the following: Brand style guides This document guides anyone creating content for a brand at any time. What is the tone of voice and brand personality? How is it best represented visually, and what are the brand colours and fonts? This can be a challenging document to put together, and it usually isn’t the content marketer who is tasked with doing so, but is essential to aligning brand communications. It is also a document that tends to be ‘live’, as it is constantly updated as the brand and content landscapes evolve and new conventions come into play. Brand style guidelines are also referred to as Corporate Identity (CI) or Brand Identity (BI). Content calendars Content calendars assist the content marketer in planning the material they will be sharing, across which platforms, and when. The more advance planning is undertaken, the easier it is to react quickly to tactical opportunities.
Workflow map A workflow map documents the path a piece of content takes when it is created. What are the steps in approval, how is it optimised for digital publishing, who has final sign off? Is it a duplicate of existing content, and where else can it be used? A workflow map assists you in streamlining this process. It is useful to have this graphic overview of the process. The workflow map stipulates the order in which the work is to be completed, and show who is responsible at specific points.
Persona map As discussed, the persona map assists content creators in focusing on those for whom they are in fact creating content and what the motivations of consumers may be
9.8 ADVANTAGES AND CHALLENGES Content marketing can position your brand as an expert through the sharing of useful content in your specific field. It also enables you to reach the customer who has a fragmented attention span spread across many devices and content touchpoints. One of the more powerful benefits is that you can learn a lot about your target consumer through the content with which they do or do not engage. The more targeted and ongoing your content, the more data you can gather about how effectively you are reaching those you need to. One of the great challenges in content marketing is providing content that is truly interesting and engaging to the right people with the right mix of subject matter and brand. Matching content to the required outcome for your strategic purposes takes dedication and focus. In the context of ongoing content production, it can also be a challenge to maintain levels of quality over time, which is why process and quality assurance steps must be put in place. Consider that the goal is not to create as much content as possible; rather, it is to focus on relevance and content that matches strategic outcomes
