



THE	SUREFIRE	DIGITAL	MARKETING	 STRATEGY	TO	TRIPLE	YOUR	SALES 

BUILD CUSTOMER AVATAR

The ability to truly understand your customers is often underrated. Nothing will work if your digital marketing strategy is not tailored to your audience. 

Nothing will work unless you do. 

You need to research and develop a customer avatar. A customer avatar is a breakdown of your audience’s goals, interests, pain points, and other demographic characteristics. 


Your customer avatar will help you develop a ads that work. Your ads will be so	relevant to your audience that you will get a ton of impressions, clicks, and conversions. Understanding your customers is the key  to success. 

How do you research your customers? 
There are plenty  of ways to research your customers  to develop an avatar. Take a look at the next page for some of our recommendations.

1 ) Analyze your current customers Take a look at your current customers. Who are they? What do they like? How old are they? Where are they located? Dig deep and see if you can identify any trends. You will likely find that there are many traits that your customers have in common. 

2) Analyze your competitors Now that you’ve looked inside, let’s take a look outside. What are your competitors doing? What are consumer preferences in your industry?
When analyzing your competitors, ask yourself the following questions: 

What is their unique selling proposition? How are they positioning themselves in your industry?
 How is their website designed? If you believe they are successful, does it make sense for you to incorporate some items into your website? 
What does their social media accounts look like? How many followers do they have? Are they getting engagement? What is their message to their audience? 
How strong is their search engine presence? Are they paying for Google ads? Do they have #1 rankings? Use a tool like SEM Rush to figure this out. Are they doing any email marketing or blogging? Look through their blog and email opt-in forms on their website.

If it isn’t broke, don’t fix it. If there is an industry leader in your market, try to learn as much as you can. You do not have to “copy them”. But, you can use what you learn and crush them! In terms of consumer  preferences, there are a few things that you can do to assess this: 

Industry reports: There are plenty of industry-specific reports that break down consumer preferences for you. The SBA recommends using the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Conduct surveys: If you cannot find data points on what you are looking for, use Google Surveys. It is the easiest way to get fast and reliable insights from consumers across the internet. You can create a survey and target it at industry-specific users across the web to complete it.

3 ) Use Facebook Audience Insights 
This is our favorite. Facebook Audience Insights is powerful. It allows you to plug-in demographics and it will automatically display trends associated with those demographics. It will show you the top interests of your audience, their age, lifestyle behaviors, and much more. 

You can use Facebook Audience Insights even if you do not have any customers. Take your best guess at who you think your customers are, and allow the insights you gather to help you develop your customer avatar. 

Once you start implementing your digital marketing strategy, you can target various segments of your customer avatar. Based on the response, you can continue to tweak your customer avatar.


YOUR DIGITAL STRATEGY

This is the exact digital marketing strategy that will help you triple your sales. Here’s a quick recap. 

The most cost-effective way to grow your awareness & visibility on the web is to invest into search engine optimization, social media management, and email marketing. If you develop these assets, you will not need to rely so much on digital advertising. 

The con to this approach is that it takes long to implement and reap the results. You need to be willing to invest at least 6-12 months before seeing significant results.

A short-cut is to invest into digital advertising. Specifically, Google and Facebook advertising. You can create ads and start driving traffic to your website immediately. After optimizing your ads for at least 3 months, you should begin to see an upward spike in conversions.

For those who do not convert immediately, which is most traffic initially, we recommend adding lead nurturing to your strategy. Lead nurturing consists of remarketing, email marketing, and content marketing. The goal is to increase touch points with interested prospects and expedite your sales cycle. 

And lastly, we discussed your website. Your website is the single-most important	 factor	of your digital	 marketing strategy. It determines	your conversion rate and it needs	to be carefully designed. 

Now, let’s talk about implementation







IMPLEMENTING YOUR STRATEGY

Now What? 
Now that you have your digital marketing strategy, you need to implement it. Here are your options: 
1. Do it yourself 
2. Hire an employee 
3. Hire an agency 

Let’s discuss all three options.

Anyone can implement a digital marketing strategy. However, it takes time. There will be trial and error. And for new digital marketers, it will be more error than anything in the beginning. For those who are on a budget, your only option may be to do it yourself. You will need to invest into a lot of training to fully understand the components. 

And, you should realistically plan for slower growth in your business because you will be spending so much time trying to learn and implement digital marketing. 

Hiring an employee is more ideal. This way you can continue to work on managing your business – developing your products and services, dealing with customers, managing finances, and other items on every business owner’s to-do list.

But, experienced employees are very expensive. On top of that, you will likely have to train and manage your employees. Most small businesses do not have $50,000, plus benefits, to hire a single full-time employee.

Which leads us to hiring an agency. Agencies exist to provide the exact services you need at a fraction of the cost. They hire experienced employees with specialized skill sets. A turnkey agency can help you implement your digital marketing strategy fast and effectively.